Contents
Preface
1. The Place of Jnanayoga in the Gita
2. The Pedigree of Jnanayoga
3. The Doctrine of Avataras
4. Jnanayoga as the Means to Moksha
5. Pravritti Marga, Action and Inaction
6. The Characteristics of a Sage
7. Action-Sacrifice and Wisdom-Sacrifice
8. The Surest Way to Moksha



Preface from the 1923 2nd Edition
Pandit Bhavani Shankar visited Calcutta in March, 1914, and delivered a series of 8 lectures expounding the 4th discourse [chapter] of the Gita. The lectures were on the following subjects: 1. The Place of Jnanayoga in the Gita, 2. The Pedigree of Jnanayoga, 3. The Doctrine of Avataras, 4. Jnanayoga as the Means to Moksha, 5. Pravritti Marga, Action and Inaction, 6. The Characteristics of a Sage, 7. Action-Sacrifice and Wisdom-Sacrifice, 8. The Surest Way to Moksha. These lectures which were open to all were delivered in the palatial residence of Kumar Narendranath Mittra. Invitations were issued to those who were known to be interested in the study of the Gita and ancient religions and philosophies. The audience numbered about 50 who regularly attended the series, following the lecturer keenly day by day as he expounded the priceless truths contained in the Gita.

Pandit Bhavani Shankar has made the Gita his own, and he can expound, as few else can, the illuminating and soul-satisfying teaching of that priceless scripture. It was indeed a relief in these days of irresponsible elocution and sickening sensationalism to listen to one who could strike the true spiritual note and touch with his moral ardour and devotional fire the eternal in us. The lectures gave a fresh incentive to those who see the beauty of a life of devotion and renunciation, and humbly strive to realise it, and proved what was always felt that we want lecturers like Pandit Bhavani Shankar in Calcutta, who could quote chapter and verse from our own scriptures in support of his statements about the spiritual path. Calcutta is a very good field for workers like him and we wish that he would visit the place regularly every year. The substance of these lectures is given in the following pages.



Lecture 1: The Place of Jnanayoga in the Gita
This is an introductory discourse which dwells not only on the sequential and organic connection between the discourses of the Gita but also on the intimate connection of the Gita itself with the Mahabharata, in which Vyasa has set it in the most appropriate place. So, to understand the full teaching of the Gita, it should not be studied as detached from the Mahabharata. Now the Mahabharata is an Itihasa, that is, a record of events that actually happened, deriving all their spiritual significance from the great Avatara who is the centre and life of the Itihasa. It is an allegory as well, describing the stages of the path which the soul has to pass through on its way to emancipation. It is also called the fifth Veda, and it marks an epoch in the history of Our Dharma. For, it was in Mahabharata that the great Vyasa presented the doctrine contained in the four Vedas, giving this doctrine a turn with special reference to the great Avatar, round whom the chief interest of the Mahabharata centres. So, to appreciate fully the doctrine of the Gita, all these considerations should be borne in mind· and it should be studied as part of, and as having intimate relation with, the Mahabharata in the midst of which Vyasa has purposely placed it.

Looking to the fourth discourse of the Gita which deals with Jnana-Yoga, we see how appropriately it comes after the first three discourses. The first discourse treats of Vishada, which is also called Yyoga, because it is not the passing despondency of the disappointed man but the deeper deadness felt in the heart, which leaves a permanent sense of unreality of the things seen and felt by the separative self, and which precedes the thirst of the soul for the real. And one of the names by which Arjuna is called is Nara. The first discourse vividly describes the position of the Jivatma as it enters the threshold of manhood after passing its stages of irresponsible childhood and of disciplined youth (the discipline imposed from outside by the Shastras and Acharyas). Arjuna has controlled the senses and the mind and has built up a strong centre of individual consciousness. But the utter unreality of the external, he has still to learn. He has not as yet killed what in the “Voice of the Silence” is called the Raja of the senses, the “slayer of the real,” and deep despondency possesses his mind when at last he has to pass through the experience. He is now called upon, not only to kill the 11 Akshouhinis of kinsmen formed of his five senses and six passions (Kama, Krodha, etc.) but to slay even the Dharmacharyas to whom he was looking up hitherto for guidance. When the necessity arises for such action his whole existence seems to Arjuna to have dissolved into nothingness, and in one line the Lord conveys to him the teaching at this critical juncture. “A Pandita, O Arjuna, neither grieves for the dead nor for the living.” That is how the teaching commences in the second discourse which is called Sankhya-yoga. A Pandita is he who knows the Atman, the real as distinguished from the false, the permanent from the fleeting.

The second discourse begins with the analysis of man. It shows that man is not his body, because though the body undergoes changes, the sense of self is untouched by them. Similarly are pleasure and pain which are neither in the senses themselves nor in the external objects but are at the points of contact of senses and their objects and are therefore impermanent and changing. Amidst this flux and change the self alone is changeless and permanent and, because it is so, it is the only reality. “For, the unreal existeth not, nor can the real ever cease to be.” Thus should the aspirant dissociate himself from his body and the sensations and feelings, and with reason so purified, realise the self within himself, the self “whom weapons cleave not, nor fire burns, nor water wets, nor wind dries, the unperceivable, the unthinkable and the unchangeable self.” If the aspirant is not capable of thus realising the self let him follow Buddhi-yoga. Let him do his work casting off attachment, balanced in mind whether success or failure falls to his lot. By thus giving up the desire for Phalam (fruit) and balancing himself under all ups and downs of life he will attain to that disciplined and one-pointed reason by which he will realise the self. He will realise that he is distinct from his sensations and perceptions and from feelings and emotions, and that pleasures and pains and joys and sorrows by which he was measuring his life till now, touch not the inner serenity, the harmony of the self. Shri Shankaracharya’s definition of “phalam” is specially note worthy : “phalgutaya layam adarshanam gachhatiti phalam.” Phalam (fruit) implies something that vanishes, some thing unsubstantial.

For such a Sankhya-yogi, he who has realised the harmony of the inner self, Karma apparently seems to have no application. Yet it is not so. His very knowledge makes him a more responsible person. Though he has no object to gain by Karma, still to set a good example to the ignorant, he must engage himself in it. Karma includes not only bodily but mental action as well, and as there is no escape from Karma for the ignorant it should be well directed for the benefit of the world. Nor can it be said that after realising his inner self the aspirant’s goal is reached. The harmony that he has attained is still of the separative self depending on the background of the not-self for its existence. He must now learn that the not-self, which he had so long discarded and flung away from himself, is not an alien to, but a manifestation, as his own self is, of the transcendent self, the fount of all reality (the light of Ishwara). The harmony which he had gained within, must now be realised outside as well. So, in the Voice of the Silence it is taught: “In order to become the knower of ALL SELF, thou hast first of self to be the knower. To reach the knowledge of that self, thou hast to give up Self to Non-Self, Being to Non-Being.” Further, the only Mukti, worth striving for, is the mergence of the individual self into Ishwara through the light of Ishwara. And when Bhagavan Himself, the Ishwara, comes down and engages Himself in action, turns the wheel of life for the good of the world, how can the apirant follow a different course? When the aspirant has realised the inner harmony of the Jivatma in himself, which is the object of Sankhya-yoga, and further, carried it into the outer world in action also, for which Karma~yoga is enjoined in the 3rd discourse, he becomes fit for receiving the illumination through the light of Ishwara which unifies the self and not-self. Hence Jnana-yoga follows the Sankhya and Karma Yogas in the Gita.



Lecture 2: The Pedigree of Jnanayoga
We have this pedigree given in the first sloka of the 4th discourse of the Gita. Bhagavan says: “I imparted this Yoga to Vivaswan; Vivaswan imparted it to Manu and from Manu Ikshwaku derived it.” Vivaswan is the sun, the Hiranyagarbha-Brahma, the creator of our system. What Bhagavan means is that this Hiranayagarbha-Brahma created this world through the illumination derived from this Yoga. So did Manu create the human race with its help, and it was imparted to the Rajarshis like Ikshwaku that they may rule their subjects having the spiritual welfare of the race in view, enforcing conformity to the Pravritti Dharma of Varna and Ashrama and keeping the way open to the Nivritti Dharma of renunciation. The continuity of the tradition of this supreme Yoga suffered a break for want of proper disciples. For, when this Yoga falls into the hands of the weak who cannot control their minds and senses or of persons of Ahankara in whom the subtle desire for glory and power predominates, it decays. The sloka does not however imply that the Kshattriyas were the special teachers and preservers of the Yoga, for, far higher than the Rajarshis are the Devarshis and Brahmarshis; and there is the historical instance of Vishwamitra, a Rajarshi, who had to perform long and arduous tapas for becoming a Brahmarshi. One important point needs to be emphasised in connection with this sloka, and it is this: The brotherhood of adepts or Jivanmuktas is as strictly a product of Nature as a tree. It has definite and indispensable purpose and function in the development of the human race, and this function is to keep open the upward path through which descend light and leading. If on account of increase of materialism and Adharma, this spiritual connection stops, then Bhagavan Himself takes up the work of the Brotherhood and provides for the spiritual welfare of humanity. “This ancient Yoga has today been imparted to thee by me for thou art my devotee and friend; and this is the supreme secret,” so runs the next sloka. The qualifications of Arjuna to be the recipient of this supreme secret were that he was both a devotee and a friend of Bhagavan.

And here let us dwell on the Nava-vidha Bhakti. This Nava-vidha Bhakti is not the nine ways of devotion each sufficient in itself but the nine stages of the devotee. Reference to the different slokas in the Gita on this point itself will show how one stage comes after the other as a natural sequence; and the Lord’s reference specially to the eighth stage of it, viz. of Sakhyata or friendship, is very significant. Devotion to Bhagavan begins when a man acquires the control of his senses and mind by following the Pravritti Marga according to the injunctions of Shastras, and fired by the desire of knowing the truth he studies deeply the scriptures. Where there is this soul-hunger, comes devotion. The first stage is called Shravana, because the soul is now eager to hear of Bhagavan, and in listening to his glories it rejoices; the second stage, Kirtana, is reached when, filled with the joy, it begins to participate it with kindredred souls, for, out of the fulness of the devotee’s heart his mouth speaketh. The third stage is called the stage of Smaranam, brooding, when the mind always loves to dwell upon Bhagavan; and then comes the fourth stage Padasevana, when his love grows deeper, and not satisfied with merely brooding on the Lord he seeks to feel his solidarity with him and clings to His blessed feet from which flow peace and bliss.

Here the Bhakta feels the first thrills of the divine life, and with it grows his thirst for losing himself in that life; and the fifth stage of Archana is reached, when in the deep meditation of Bhagavan he forgets himself and as he continues in this stage and when Bhagavan is become enthroned in his heart more and more fully, he passes into the sixth stage of Vandanam, where he feels the presence of the Lord everywhere and in everything and like Arjuna begins to prostrate before all things both animate and inanimate, and when divine life is felt everywhere and in everything the seventh stage of Dasya naturally follows, in which whatever the bhakta does, he does it as the servant of Bhagavan, keeping Him always as the supreme goal of his life. The distance and the dual sense implied in this stage of servant and master in course of time wears off and the eighth stage of Sakhyata or friendship is reached where the oneness of the devotee with Bhagavan predominates. The tradition that Shri Krishna and Arjuna were of equal stature seems to have some allegorical significance. At this stage the devotee grows like unto the object of his devotion, just as the form to which the clay is, modelled is first united with the potter’s mind”, l and the devotee becomes fit to receive the supreme Yoga, as Arjuna as Sakha and Bhakta of Bhagavan was, as stated in the sloka. There is not still the complete unity, the thorough oneness which is reached at the ninth stage of Atmanivedana when the Bhakta disappears and Bhagavan becomes all in all (Vide 73 Sloka of Chap: XVIII). अर्जुन उवाच नष्टो मोहः स्मृतिर् लब्धा त्वत्प्रसादान् मयाच्युत स्थितो ऽस्मि गतसंदेहः करिष्ये वचनं तव || Arjuna· said: “Destroyed is delusion, and I have gained recognition through Thy Grace. O Achyuta, I am firm, with doubts gone. I will do Thy word.” It is the final surrender of the devotee’s self to Bhagavan absolutely and unconditionally. Thus devotion the potent power that leads to and makes possible the utter self-renunciation and self-surrender which are the only means for receiving spiritual illumination.



Lecture 3: The Doctrine of Avataras
The Avatara is one of the most abstruse truths of Hinduism as it is of Brahma-vidya. To have even a very faint idea of the great truth it is necessary to know what real spirituality is, to have some notion of the spiritual ideal of adeptship or Jivanmukti. It is truly said that even in this proud age of intellect very few can form a correct conception of a Jivanmukta. I may here lightly touch upon the preparatory qualifications which the aspirant for spiritual life should acquire. By Karma-marga, that is, disinterested performances of religious and secular duties, he should control his body, subdue his senses, and purify his mind. He should strive for the control and concentration of mind by Abhyasa, that is, by practice; for this purpose, he should have some fixed time in the morning and evening, when he should withdraw his mind from all external objects and learn to retire within himself. By following this practice regularly he gains habitual control of his mind which enables him to discharge his duties more effectually and also acquire the power of concentration which is so essential for deep study and devotion as well. The third qualification he should acquire, is by study and deep thinking. He should regularly study the scripture, and by deep thinking and cogitation on the profound truths, dealt with therein, he should develop the penetrative intellect which can intuite the spiritual truths which lie embedded under the apparent tangle of scriptural contradictions. By following this Jnanamarga his intellect perceives the nature of his own self, its connection with Ishwara and the important place of the Guru in the pilgrimage of the Jivatma, and as this intellectual conviction grows deeper and gains strength he begins to offer himself to his Gurudeva and Ishta-Deva, and as he surrenders himself he begins to feel the inner peace and joy which gradually transform his conviction into faith and his intellectual perceptions into self-feeling where with true devotion begins. By following this fourfold discipline inculcated in the four margas of Karma, Abhyasa, Jnana and Bhakti, he in course of time acquires the qualifications necessary for a disciple. He has developed the physical, astral and causal centres and has learnt to surrender them to his Guru-deva and at the proper time receives his first initiation. It takes place, as H. P. B. says in the Voice of the Silence, neither in the physical body which she calls the hall of ignorance, nor in the astral body which is called by her the hall of learning, but it is in the Karanasharira, the hall of wisdom, in his own Hridaya (heart), that the disciple sees Him for the first time whose life and peace he was so long feeling in his heart. Therefore does the Voice cif the Silence teach the aspirant: “Seek for Him who is to give thee birth in the hall of wisdom”). What happens is that both the physical and astral bodies fall in trance, and the disciple is in his Karana-sharira, that is, in his heart he sees his Guru-deva, and in the heart of his Gurudeva he sees his Ishtadeva, The Ishwara. The Gurudeva transmits to him the life of Ishwara, the only true life,—The Self, of which the Mandukya-Upanishad in the 7th sloka speaks as being “śāntaṃ śivam advaitaṃ . . . sa ātmā,” peace, bliss and unity,—The Mystic Consciousness wherein as in the words of the 29th sloka of the 6th discourse of the Gita “he sees the self abiding in all beings and all beings abiding in the self, and sees the same everywhere.”

The unreal life of the false separative self with its triple consciousness the seer, the seeing and the seen falls loosened from him and he is awakened in the region of the real. The 69th verse of Chap. II. of the Gita referring to this state truly says, “when it is night to all beings the sage is awake and where all beings are awake the sage is asleep.” And Shri Shankaracharya commenting on this sloka says, “To all beings the supreme reality, that is, the Divine life, is night, and there, the initiate is now fully awake. When all beings are said to be awake, i.e., when all beings who in reality sleep in the night of ignorance, imbued with the distinct notions of perceiver and things perceived that state is night in the eye of the Sage who knows the supreme reality.” He has realised the unity of life in his Karana-sharira and the effect of this first initiation, on his physical ego, is that it becomes a mere reflection of the Divine life; in other words, his personality has been killed. Not only has his physical centre, ego, become a reflection of the life of Ishwara, but as a result of the Yoga fire, the gross particles of his physical body have been purified and etherealised, making that body a vehicle refined enough for the functioning of the higher consciousness (see Swethashwetara Upanishad, part II, 12th and 13th slokas). He realises that both his physical centre and the physical centre of the Cosmos are essentially one, that they are expressions of the same Divine Life which, expressing itself in them, transcends both, and he begins to harmonise them. He therefore feels compassion for all beings (vide Gita VI. 32.): “Who so by comparison with himself, sees the same everywhere, O Arjuna, be it pleasure or pain, he is deemed the highest Yogin.” This cosmic physical centre is called in the Upanishads, Vaishwanara, and in the Gita, Adhibhuta, and is the basis of all beings. He feels, that both himself and the world outside him are but the expressions of the self same life. He is therefore called a Parivrajaka, a wanderer, because he has now realised for the first time that his true home is Ishwara from whom he has been wandering away and on reaching whom his heart is set. Of such an initiate does the 19th sloka of the 12th chapter of the Gita speak “he is one to whom censure and praise are equal, who is silent, content with anything, homeless, steady minded and full of devotion. “Such a one,” Bhagavan says, “is dear to Me.” He is silent because his heart is flowing with the peace and bliss of Bhagavan’s life, the only life he cares for. To hold forth astral peregrinations and astral lectures as objects of spiritual endeavour and as credentials of initiation, is a perversion of the teachings of Brahmavidya. It is projecting into the higher regions the separative self of the lower, whereas, the true goal of a student of Brahmavidya should be the killing of the false and separative self with the help of the life from on high, the life of Ishwara, the one centripetal force in the Cosmos. Not to speak of astral world and Swarga, even residence in Brahma-Ioka is not desirable for a man who cares for Swaswarupa-jnanam, the knowledge of the Self—vide Gita VIII, 16. The only object of the initiate is the religious enlightenment of the human race and a perfectly unselfish, self-forgetting self-annihilating devotion to that object—a self abnegation which is not temporal and must have no end for ever, but is his only talisman of safety as it ought to be the only object of his life. For this purpose he need not scour the Lokas for, from his own heart always flows a current of living moral and spiritual energy for the good of the three worlds, more potent and dynamic in its purifying and elevating effect than any number of lectures and orations whether on the physical or astral or some higher planes. This current of spiritual energy flowing from the heart of every spiritual man increases in volume and force as he grows in devotion and self-renunciation. We are not left in doubt as to the marks of a real initiate. For, in the reply given by Bhagavan to Arjuna’s query about the marks of a Sthita-prajna we have a definite and comprehensive reply. Sthitaprajna is one who has perceived the supreme reality (Brahman) as his self, according to Shri Shankaracharya’s commentary. This description is found in slokas 55, 56 & 57 of Chap. II of the Gita. In the 55th sloka we are taught the state of the initiate when he is in Karana-sharira: “When the man is satisfied in the self alone by himself, casts off all the desires of the mind, then he is said to be Sthita-prajna.” In the next sloka is described his condition when he is in the Sukshma centre: “He, whose mind is not distressed in calamities, in whom all longings for pleasures are lost, from whom attachment, fear and wrath have passed away, is called Sthita-prajna.” And how he deports when in physical consciousness, is told in the sloka following the above: “He is Sthita-prajna, who without attachment anywhere, on meeting with anything good or bad, neither exults nor hates.”

In course of time, as the initiate develops in an ever-increasing measure devotion and self-surrender to his Guru-deva and Ishta-deva, he receives his second initiation; and just as, after the first initiation, his physical ego becomes merely the reflection of the Divine life and his physical body purified and refined by the Yoga fire becomes a vehicle fit for higher consciousness, similarly, as a result of the second initiation, his astral body becomes a perfect mirror, reflecting merely the one life. In the “First steps in Occultism” H. P. B. well describes his state. In him “the power of passions is dead altogether and they have been crushed and annihilated in the retort of an unflinching will.” In him “not only all the lust and longings of the flesh are dead but also the recognition of the personal self is killed out and the astral has been reduced in consequence to a cipher.” His astral ego is now but a reflection of the Divine life and he realises that his astral centre or ego and the corresponding cosmic centre are in essence one, both reflections of the one life, and his sense of separateness between the two falls off. This astral cosmic centre is called in the Mandukya-Upanishad “Taijasa,” resplendent centre, and in the Gita, Adhidaiva, the substratum of all the Devatas. The light of Ishwara which his Gurudeva had transmitted to him at the time of the first initiation has now by his profound devotion and renunciation been transmuted into electro-spiritual force which is called the higher Kundalini and rises upwards. It now rises from the heart into the head and there brings into full functioning all the spiritual centres in the brain which up to now it was vivifying, and it passes on to what Shri Shankaracharya calls the Dhi-guha, the cave of the intellect, the space between the brows, and there electrifies Buddhi into a dynamic power resulting in spiritual clairvoyance. It then merges in the great Goddess seated in the centre of the full-blown Sahasrara (thousand-petalled lotus). And through these higher spiritual centres the initiate subdues and controls the lower Chakras. According to Hindu books of Yoga, there is in the brain the Sahasrara Chakram. “It is an unopened bud in the ordinary mortal and just as the lotus opens its petals and expands in all its bloom and beauty when the sun rises above the horizon and sheds his rays on the flower, so does the Sahasraram of the neophyte open and expand when Ishwara begins to pour His life into its centre. When fully expanded, it becomes the glorious seat of the Devi (Daivi-prakriti), and sitting on this flower the great Goddess pours out the waters of life and grace for the gratification and regeneration of the human soul.”

H. P. B. refers to this spiritual process in the following passage in the Voice of the Silence and in her notes thereon. “Let not thy ‘Heaven-born,’ merged in the sea of Māyā, break from the Universal Parent (SOUL), but let the fiery power retire into the inmost chamber, the chamber of the Heart, and the abode of the World’s Mother. Then from the heart that Power shall rise into the sixth, the middle region, the place between thine eyes, when it becomes the breath of the ONE-SOUL, the voice which filleth all, thy Master’s voice.” In her note on the words “power” and the “world mother” in the above passage she says, “these are names given to Kundalini—one of the mystic ‘Yogi powers.’ It is Buddhi considered as an active instead of a passive principle. . . .” Thus the electro-spiritual force called Kundalini is the result of the spiritual development of man and has nothing to do with physical and mechanical processes. But there is the lower Kundalini also, seated in the Muladhara Chakra, at the base of the spine, which Hatha-yogis try to awaken by Pranayama (restraint of breath). It is a dangerous process and has nothing to do with spirituality. There is another set of teachers who, by external stimuli such as crystal gazing, and focussing the attention and gaze on the Chakra between the eye-brows, advocate the development of clairvoyance, psychic vision, which is quite distinct from spiritual clairvoyance. The tiny serpent seen in this Chakram by the psychic is not the real spiritual power called Kundalini. The psychic sees different objects in a finer world just as we see here the physical objects, but there is in him the sense of separateness as deep, if not deeper, as in the ordinary man and he accentuates this separateness by setting his false and petty self against the surroundings, and striving for domination over them. This is a process, the reverse of spiritual, a projection of the lower and false into the higher and the real. Saints and sages have time and oft taught, distinguishing real spirituality from these artificial methods, which are prompted by the thirst for power and Siddhis. Thus the great sage Jnaneshwara in his “Dwadashakshari (the well-known twelve syllabled mantra) Abhanga” says: “Awakening the serpent by the control of the nine gates and passing it through Sushumna, which is one of the three Nadis, such is not, say the Munis, the path. The fount of liberation is in ceaseless contemplation of Nara-Hari.” Similarly does Machhendra teach his disciple Gorakh while telling him the real qualifications of a Chela:

[missing Sanskrit text]

“Arousing the Kundalini and forcing it up to the Brahmarandhra (the crown of the head) and thus acquiring the power of walking on water and of prophecy, do not constitute a spiritual man—such is not fit to be a Chela.”

Real spiritual clairvoyance develops in the initiate as naturally as a bud at its proper time blooms into a flower. It is vision and feeling blended into one wherein the separateness of the seer, the seeing and the seen, is altogether absent. It is this spiritual clairvoyance that Shri Shankaracharya refers to in the following sloka in the Aparokṣānubhūtiḥ.

[missing Sanskrit text]

“Vision is to be concentrated there where the triad—the seer, the sight and the seen, vanishes, and not on the base of the nose (Agneya-chakra).”

As a result of his harmonising his astral centre with the Adhidaiva centre, the basis of all devatas, through the higher Kundalini, he sees the hierarchies of cosmic intelligences, the Devas, and realises that they and himself are essentially one being expressions of the one Divine life which, expressing Itself in all these and in himself, transcends all and remains itself. He has now all the great higher Siddhis which are not so much control acquired over something outside, but knowledge realised of the inwardness of cosmic processes,—the expansion of his Buddhi into the cosmic Buddhi. With the possession of all these Siddhis the outstanding characteristic of the initiate now is his utter humility. His Abhimana, thirst for individual power and glory, has vanished. He is therefore called a Kuteechaka, one who resides in a humble hut of leaves. He has now that power which enables him to appear as nothing in the eyes of men. “Be humble, if thou wouldst attain to Wisdom. Be humbler still when Wisdom thou hast mastered.”

Then comes his third initiation, and to undersstand the significance of it, even faintly, it is necessary to know something about the unfolding of the Jivatma. The Jivatma is called in our scriptures Hamsa. Hamsa is a bird which is known to possess the peculiar power of separating off pure milk from a mixture of milk and water, and Jivatma is called a Hamsa, because, it, like the bird of the name, has the power of discriminating the real from the unreal in Samsara, which is a combination of both. Up till now this Hamsa, that is, Jivatma, had fed itself on the very cream of the best and noblest experience gained in innumerable lives. Even at the time of the first initiation, the initiate has realised that the real self is the Divine Life, which transcends the self of the Jivatma. But now, as a result of further spiritual progress, he realises more deeply than before the utter unreality of this individuality, that it is a thing “which he has created with pain for his own use and by means of which he purposes to reach to the Life beyond individuality.” He now retires deeper within and approaches the sanctuary of the Self nearer than ever before and is realising in a greater and fuller measure the peace and bliss of the one life. This further spiritual progress that he has made and which enables him to go through the third initiation, involves the spiritual transformation of his Karana-Sharira, which now becomes an upadhi of pure (Sattvic) Akasha. His spiritual ego, the centre of Karana-sharira, which, at this stage, is called Prajna in Mandukyopanishad, is seen by him to be a mere reflection of divine light and, now no more being limited by his Karana-sharira, is realised as the cosmic centre of that plane, called Ishwara in the Mandukyopanishad and Adhiyajna in Gita; and all the rich treasure of knowledge and experience gathered by him with pain and patience through innumerable lives, and of which his Karana-sharira was built, is now gladly sacrificed by him to Adhiyajna, and thus is increased the fund of cosmic intelligence working for the uplifting of the race. He now sees that the end and consummation of all knowledge, austerities and sacrifices is the Great Goddess, the divine light of Ishwara, at Whose Feet he now offers his individuality purified and ennobled by the virtuous Karma of a series of incarnations. At this stage he is called a Hamsa, that is, one who has realised that he and the cosmic centre of Adhiyajna are one.

Now he finds that all the six great Saktis, which are developed in him, are but the manifestations of the one self, the Divine Life. These six Saktis are: (I) Jnana Sakti, ability to see the past and future; (2) Ichha Sakti, the power of the will; (3) Kriya Sakti, the mysterious power of thought which enables it to produce external perceptible and phenomenal results by its own inherent energy; (4) Mantrika Sakti, the power of letters and mantras; (5) Para Sakti, which includes the powers of light and heat; (6) Kundalini Sakti, already mentioned. He has now to fight the final struggle against flesh that will liberate him once and for ever from the bonds of matter, and pass the 4th initiation. He has now risen above the limitations of the three bodies, but he has still to cross the neutral barrier. He has to fasten the energies of his soul on this supreme struggle. When the human monad is completely isolated from the three bodies-physical, astral and causal, it is as it were at a neutral point of consciousness and no consciousness is experienced by it. It is the Maha Sushupti, and before the monad can be finally liberated, it should cross this neutral barrier. Bhagavan refers to this struggle when he says in the 14th sloka of the 7th chapter of the Gita, “Hard is my divine Maya to surmount. Those who seek Me alone pass over this Maya.” The result of this last struggle, that is, success or defeat in it, entirely depends upon the latent energy of the Jivatma resulting from devotion to Ishwara, its previous training and past Karma. It is the real Kurukshetra for the Jivatma where it hears in full the song of life–Mahashmashana, the great burning ground, where it hears the voice of the cosmic deep and where Ahamkara is reduced to ashes. It is Mahashmashana because it is the death of the individual man from whose ashes the regenerated man springs into existence electrified by the Song of Life. If he has emerged from this final struggle triumphant, then he is a full-blown adept, a Jivanmmukta, who has entirely merged himself in the One Life. He is now called a Paramahamsa, that is, one who has realised “That,” that is, He, the One Life and himself are one. He has become “Om” because “sa” and “ha” of “Soham” being eliminated in him, he remains only the “Om.”

Thus far we have the guidance of the Mandukyopanishad, from stage to stage, in the spiritual progress of the Jivatma, till the liberated man has triumphed over all the bonds of matter. He is now a Jivanmukta, for whom Samsara can weave no illusion, and nature holds no secret. He has crossed the ocean of Maya and has fully entered the divine light. Even for him there stretch forth further vistas of progress. Saith the Light on the Path: “For within you is the light of the world, the only light that can be shed on the Path. If you are unable to perceive it within you, it is useless to look for it elsewhere. It is beyond you; because when you reach it you have lost yourself. It is unattainable, because it for ever recedes. You will enter the light, but you will never touch the flame.” The further stages of progress hinted at in this passage are also referred to in the Hindu scriptures which darkly hint at five further stages of spiritual height. They involve the most arduous Tapas out of all human experience and utterly beyond human perception or imagination. In enumerating the four classes of His devotees in the 16th verse of the 7th Chapter of the Gita) Bhagavan includes the Jnanin as one of those four classes of Bhaktas, and in the following 17th and 18th verses Bhagavan says “among these four classes of Bhaktas, who are all noble, the Jnanin surpasseth all, for he is My very Self; as steadfast in mind, he resorts to Me alone as the unsurpassed goal”; and in the following verse, the 19th, Bhagavan says, “at the end of many births the Jnani comes to Me, realising that Vasudeva is the all; he is the Mahatman, very hard to find.” Again in the third verse of the same Chapter of the Gita we have the following statement. Bhagavan says, “among thousands of men one perchance strives for perfection; even among those who strive and are perfect only one perchance knows Me in truth.” Thus the teaching of the Gita is clear. It points out that even after man has fully entered the light and become a Jivanmukta, it is possible for him to attain further spiritual heights. He has entered the light, but he has not merged himself in the divine centre, the spiritual sun from whom this light emanates. Bhagavan says that even among Mahatmas one who has attained this condition is very hard to find. Now turn to the 50th verse of the 18th chapter of the Gita. The Lord says, “How he who has attained perfection reaches Brahman, that in brief, do thou learn from me, O son of Kunti—that supreme consummation of knowledge” and in the following five verses is treated the Parabhakti, possible only to the Jnani, by means of which he enters Bhagavan and becomes Brahman. Thus run these verses: “Endued with pure reason, controlling the self with firmness, abandoning sound and other objects, laying aside love and hatred, resorting to a sequestered spot, eating but little, speech and body and mind subdued, always engaged in meditation and concentration, endued with dispassion, having abandoned egotism, violence, arrogance, desire, enmity, property, and free from the notion of ‘mine’ and being peaceful, he is fit for becoming Brahman. Becoming Brahman of serene self, he neither grieves nor desires; treating all beings alike, he attains supreme devotion to Me. By devotion he knows Me in truth, what and who I am; then knowing Me in truth he forthwith enters into Me.” Add to this the 4th verse in chapter 12th referring to this same state: “Having restrained all senses, always equanimous, devoted to the welfare of all beings they reach Myself (the central spiritual Sun, the highest goal).” At the fourth initiation he had become a Jivanmukta who has triumphed over all matter, one who has liberated himself from all bonds of Samsara. He had then fully entered the divine light, the veil of Ishwara, the veil of light through which Ishwara manifests Himself to the highest spiritual perception of a human being. Shri Shankaracharya in his “Soundaryalahari” addressing this light says, “Thou art the body of Shambhu.” The light is, as it were, a cloak or a mask with which Ishwara is enabled to make His appearance. But Ishwara, the real centre of light, is not visible even to the highest spiritual perception of man. Hence in the above quoted passage in the Light on the Path it is said, “you will enter the light but you will never touch the flame.” The goal of Parabhakti, which is only possible for a Jnani, is the merging into this centre of light, Ishwara, the highest goal of spiritual endeavour. This mergence of the Jivanmukta into Ishwara may be likened to what may happen in the case of the sun when a comet falls upon it; there is in the case of the sun an accession of heat and light; so also, whenever any particular individual reaches the highest state of spiritual culture, develops in himself all the virtues that alone entitle him to a union with Ishwara and finally unites his soul with Ishwara, there is, as it were, a sort of reaction emanating from Ishwara for the good of humanity; and in particular cases an impulse is generated in Ishwara to incarnate for the good of humanity. This is the highest consummation of human aspiration and endeavour. Even in the earlier stages of his spiritual life, an aspirant for the higher life becomes a participator of the grand silent work in the spiritual enlightenment of his race,—the current of the living moral and spiritual energy flowing from his heart being his humble contribution. As he progresses on the path his contribution increases till by inconceivably ardous tapas and renunciation he succeeds in bringing down the great Ishwara Himself to do this work. This is one aspect of the doctrine about Avatara. The subject is a profound one and touches one of the most jealously guarded secrets of Brahma·Vidya. If the latter-day Theosophical teachers had even the faintest idea of the sanctity and solemnity of the subject we would have been spared so much blasphemous talk of preparations for an Avatara and such flippant prattle about sacred things. We see the wisdom of the ancients in drawing the veil of secrecy on these high subjects; for, when sacred things are bandied about light-heartedly, spiritual degradation is the result.

The very word Avatara implies a coming down. Viewed from the point of view of the Jivanmukta it is a gradual ascent and the final absorption of the human soul into Ishwara, but from the stand-point of Ishwara it is a coming down of Bhagavan to the plane of Jivatma. Ishwara therefore is not a result of evolution, but One who makes evolution possible. Hence Bhagavan says, in the 6th verse of the 4th Chapter, “Though I am unborn, of imperishable nature, and though I am the Lord of all beings, yet controlling my own nature, I take birth through the instrumentality of my Maya.” Bhagavan controls his Prakriti having three qualities and through the instrumentality of His light, His Yogamaya, He incarnates Himself. Further, in the 7th and 8th verses of the 4th Chapter of the Gita, we are given not only the time of his coming down but also the reason for it. “Whenever there is decay of Dharma, that is, religion, and ascendency of irreligion, then I manifest myself. For the protection of the good, for the destruction of evil-doers, and for the firm establishment of religion I am born in every Yuga.” If Bhagavan appears as an Avatar at such long intervals as is implied by this verse, His Avataras will not be many, at least so far as our humanity is concerned. In fact we know only of two previous human Avataras, viz: of Parashurama, and of Shri Ramchandra. Even supposing that Bhagavan manifested Himself in lands other than our own, His Avataras cannot be many. How are we to explain then, the statement in the 5th verse—“Many births of Mine have passed as well as thine, O Arjuna, all these I know, thou knowest them not, O harasser of foes.” The many births referred to in the verse, include not only His human Avataras but also the many births of the great Jivanmukta who had absorbed himself in Bhagavan and who, owing to the infinite love and compassion he had developed in himself for humanity, had generated an impulse in Ishwara to incarnate Himself for the good of the human race.

