CHAPTER IX 
THE DOCTRINE OF THE BHAGAVAD-GITA 
In studying the Bhagavad Gita it is necessary, at the outset, to remember that the eighteen  discourses are intimately connected with one another and that each discourse describes a  particular aspect of human life, and leads us on to the next in orderly sequence. For purposes  of our study, however, it is convenient to arrange the discourses in three broad groups.  Taking the first as an introductory discourse, you find that Lord Shri Krishna refers in the  next five chapters, to the several schools of philosophy, that flourished at the time, namely;  the Sankhya, Karma, Gnana, Sanyasa, and Abhyasa, each describing the path towards  salvation.  
The great Lord then examines the merits and defects of each school, and points out that there  are, in nature, two important entities or factors which the several schools have lost sight of,  and without the help of which the paths recommended by those philosophers will not be of  much avail. He then expounds his own doctrine or theory with regard to the goal of human  life, and from this standpoint supplies the key, as it were, with which the different viewpoints  could be reconciled so as to evolve them in a harmonious whole in proper setting. This  doctrine is enunciated in the next  
59 
group of six chapters beginning with the seventh discourse.  
You remember that the Great Lord referring to Himself in another connection says this in  Chapter IX-6: "Though I am unborn, of imperishable nature and though I am the Lord of  beings, yet presiding over (controlling) my own nature I am born through my Maya." Now,  every system of philosophy postulates the existence of a First Cause, and though there is  differences of opinion as to the nature of this First Cause or its attributes, it is agreed on all  hands that this First Cause (Parambrahma) is omnipresent and eternal; is not Gnatha (ego),  not Gnanam (consciousness), not Gneyam (non-ego). Any positive definition of this principle  is impossible, and whatever description of it can be attempted is only by means of a negative  definition. It is unknowable and therefore referred to as Avyaktamoorti and only becomes  knowable when manifesting itself as the Logos or Ishwara; so it is possible to know  something about its manifestations. When Evolution commences, it becomes active, and at  the time of cosmic activity, there starts from it what might be called a centre of Conscious  Energy. This is the word made manifest, Ishwara or Sabda Brahma.  
He is also described as Sat-Chit-Ananda in Ch. XIV-27, where Bhagavan says: "I am the  image or the seat of the Immortal and Indestructible Brahma, of the Eternal law (Dharma)  and of absolute happiness." He is Sat, who ever is (that is without becoming or change in  past, present 
60 
or future). He is Chit because in Him the eternal Dharma of Cosmos, the whole law of cosmic  evolution abides. He is Anandam because he is the abode of bliss, and the highest happiness  possible for man is attained when the Jivatma, the human soul, reaches Him. He is thus an  object of the highest knowledge that man is capable of acquiring. You can have some little  glimpse or conception of His nature in Slokas 4 & 5 of Ch. IX where Bhagavan says: "By Me  all this world is pervaded, in My form unmanifested (Avyaktamoorti). All beings dwell in me  and I do not dwell in them. Look at My condition when manifested as Ishwara." "He is the  beginning of all creation and the end of all evolution." (VII-6). "All beings in the manifested  Cosmos as well as the whole of this universe are woven in Me as a row of gems on a string  (VII-7). 
This view is again confirmed later on, in XIII-26, where Bhagavan says: "Know that all beings (unmoving or moving), have come from the union of My two Prakritis." What are  these two Prakritis which are under His control? Bhagavan says (VII-4): "earth, water, fire,  air, ether, Manas Buddhi and Ahankara ― this is my eightfold Prakriti." This is Mulaprakriti,  undifferentiated, giving rise to five Tanmatras, Ahankara, Buddhi and Manas. There is  another Prakriti (VII-5) which is superior and which supports and sustains the whole  universe. It is called the Mahachaitanya of the whole Cosmos. It is the one great power that  guides the whole Course of Evolution, leading Nature towards its goal. It is the source of  light, of various modes of consciousness, 
PRINCIPLES OF MAN, SOLAR SYSTEM AND COSMOS 
Maheswara Parabrahm 
(Sabda Brahma, Sat-Chit-Ananda) 
(Paramatma) 
Daiviprakriti Mulaprakriti 
 (Gayatri, Mahachaitanyam) (Avyakta, Maya)  (Chichchhakti) 

Karana Sharira (Hall of Wisdom) 
Sookshma Sharira  (Hall of Learning) 
Sthoola Sharira (Hall of Ignorance) 
Prajna (Ecstatic Consciousness) 
Taijasa 
(Clairvoyant  Consciousness) 
Viswa 
(Objective 
Consciousness) 
 Swar Loka Sutratma 
Bhuvar Loka Hiranyagarbha Bhu Loka Vishwanara

62  
and of life manifested in every kind of organism that we know of in Nature.  
When Evolution begins, Ishwara wakes up, so to say, with the image or conception of what is  to be in the Cosmos, which Daiviprakriti or His Light catches and impresses on Cosmic  matter which is already manifested. This Light may, therefore, be said to be a kind of link  between objective matter and the subjective thought of Ishwara. While Mulaprakriti is the  cause of bondage, Daiviprakriti is the cause of illumination. It is also symbolised as Gayatri  in our Hindu Philosophy. It represents the life-aspect, while Mulaprakriti represents the form aspect in Cosmos. This is further illustrated in Slokas 8-1118 where Bhagavan says, with  reference to his Vibhutis: "In water I am sapidity, I am the light in the sun and the moon. I am  the syllable Om in the Vedas, sound in ether, humanity in men, etc."  
Here Lord Shri Krishna refers to all the excellent qualities manifested in every region of  phenomenal existence, as springing from Himself, and regrets that the world does not  understand His real nature. For Bhagavan says: "The ignorant regard me as manifestation of  Avyakta, not knowing my supreme and imperishable and best nature. I am not visible to all,  veiled as I am by my Yoga Maya. The deluded world does not comprehend Me who am  unborn and imperishable" (VII-24-25). This Yoga Maya is His Light, Daiviprakriti, behind  which is Bhagavan unperceived. The reference is to the view held by the  
63 
Sankhya school that Avyaktam (Parambrahma veiled by Mulaprakriti) takes on a kind of  phenomenal differentiation on account of association with Upadhi" and in the course of such  differentiation becomes the Atma of the individual, so that in tracing the path towards the  goal, if you could control the action of the Upadhi and destroy the Maya it has created, the  result would be the complete extinction or annihilation of man's individuality and its final  absorption (laya) in Parambrahma. This view, Lord Shri Krishna says, is wrong, because  Ishwara and His Light are here, entirely lost sight of.  
The Sankhyas consider Mulaprakriti as the source of matter as well as of force, while  Daiviprakriti is regarded as an aspect or manifestation of Mulaprakriti, and when you try to  trace the source of the Upadhi to Mulaprakriti, in that attempt the individuality becomes lost  in Mulaprakriti, and you cannot cross the neutral barrier without the help of Ishwara.  Secondly, this view of the Sankhyas excludes the possibility of Avataras and Jivanmuktas coming down for the sake of helping humanity. For when once man has reached the stage at  which his whole individuality is completely annihilated, the existence of an Avatar would be,  as a matter of simple logical inference, an impossibility. Bhagavan, therefore, controverts this  theory of the Sankhyas and strikes a clear note of warning in Chapter XII verses 3, 4, 5,  against following this doctrine.  
The Vedantins, however, try to find the source of consciousness. They hold that it is a mode  or mani 
18 Of Chapter VII.
64  
festation of the Light, which is life, and that this Light permeates every kind of organism and  is manifested in everyone of the Upadhis as the real ego of man. Now, evolutionary progress  is effected by the continual perfecting of the Upadhi or organism through which the Light works. As the Upadhis are rendered more and more pure and perfected, man's intelligence on  the physical, astral, and spiritual planes will become more and more perfect, until that stage is  reached when man will be enabled to recognise and perceive Bhagavan. : Mukti is, therefore,  not the loss of individuality, but the perfection of individuality. The ego in the Sthoola  Sharira gains merely the experiences of everyday life; that is, the animal passions and  emotions and ordinary thoughts connected with the physical wants of man are confined to the  Sthoola and Sukshma Shariras.  
But the Karana Sharira is the storehouse, in which the best experiences of man are garnered  in every incarnation. In fact, the germs of every quality or attribute that is noble and  enduring, all the higher emotions, impulses and aspirations that go deep into the intellectual  nature of man are impressed on the Karana Sharira. Its place of existence is Sutratma, and as  the individual passes from incarnation to incarnation, with its fund of experiences, a higher  individuality is evolved, thus keeping up the continued existence of the Jiva as an individual  monad. It is the real ego of man. Bhagavan throws out a kind of feeler, as it were, of His  Light into various organisms and assimilates the spiritual experiences which result from its  action as it vibrates on  
65 
the organism along a series of incarnations. The individuality of man thus becomes united to  that of Ishwara. He who is Prajna then becomes the Sarvajna.  
There is another great difficulty for man to understand the nature of the supreme self and it is  this. Bhagavan says: "The whole world is deluded by three sorts of things composed of  Gunas, and therefore does not know Me, and this Maya of the three Gunas is divine and hard  to surmount." "Gunas" is a technical term. Guna is not the property or attribute of any  substance, like the colour of an object. The Gunas are born of Prakriti, which is the root of  Samsara. The Gunas are said to bind Kshetrajna as it were, because they exist having  Kshetrajna as the basis of their existence (XIV-5). Prakriti is the mother of all material  objects. The sun, moon, stars, mountains, seas, forest, men, birds, beasts, mind, and body-all  are generated from her. The Gunas are mentioned in Chap. XIV (6-7-8).  
As a result of past Samskaras they produce effects characteristic of the Guna with which a  man is born. Guna, in that sense, is a result of Karma, and Karma in its turn determines the  Guna. The Gunas pervade the whole Universe, for, "there is no being on earth or heaven who  is free from the three Gunas" (XVIII-40) and this subject Bhagavan explains at great length,  in the last discourse, with special reference to all activities of man, such as knowledge,  action, intellect and pleasure. It is enough, for the present, to note that Tamas is connected  with the gross passions and 
66  
pleasures experienced in the Sthoola Sharira; Rajas with the passionate and restless activity  of the mind and the Sukshma Sharira; and Sattva with the noble and higher aspirations in the  Karana Sharira, the essence of all this bundle of attributes being comprised in Parambrahma.  Bhagavan says that "Verily this Divine illusion of Mine made of Gunas, is hard to surmount.  Whoever seek Me alone, they cross over this illusion." (VII-l4.)  
How to cross the illusion made of the Gunas? 
Perform Karma for His sake (as Yajna) and in the course of performance of duty in a proper  and disinterested manner, you get rid of desires, and the mind becomes purified, when Bhakti  slowly develops. So long as you identify yourself with Upadhis, there is differentiation, but  when Parabhakti sets in, all ignorance and delusion are destroyed and when you go to  Bhagavan with supreme devotion, you can cross the neutral barrier and reach the gateway  which points towards the Goal. When the soul has reached that stage of evolution, when it  does not want anything of the world, when it has outgrown the promptings of desire and  gained freedom by love, there are no more duties to be performed, and, not till then, can man  give up Dharma. So Bhagavan says in Sloka 66 of the 18th Discourse: "Give up all Dharma,  come to Me for shelter and I shall liberate you."  
"All beings are subject to Moha, deluded by attachment and aversion", says Bhagavan. So  when their senses, mind and intellect are all coloured, and they cannot have a perfect  knowledge of things as they  
67 
really are, even of the external world, how can you expect to acquire a knowledge of the Self  and of Bhagavan? True, there are different kinds of devotees, the distressed, the seekers of  knowledge and of wealth and the wise. From one standpoint these can be classed according to  the nature of the three Gunas. But the Karta is one who has a longing to reach Bhagavan; as  he seeks to know how he can satisfy this longing, he becomes a Jignasu; when he feels the  peace and bliss of Bhagavan he is the real Artharthi; and lastly he becomes the real Gnani  when he knows the real nature of Bhagavan. Such a Gnani who cultivates Ananya Bhakti will  reach the goal after many births (VII-19). Such a one is hard to find because Bhagavan says:  "Among thousands one only strives for perfection (purity), for purifying himself by Tapas  and Dhyana, and even among those who become perfect scarcely one reaches me" (knows me  in truth) (VII-3). The path of liberation is long and tedious, full of obstacles and dangers.  Some with the object of immediate gain or impelled by a desire for Siddhis (powers), worship  the Devatas, thus reaching a stage, in the course of evolution, at which you are absorbed in  them and cannot reach Bhagavan (VII-23). So you must not forget the centre who is  Bhagavan (Ishwara) all along. There are those whose sin has come to an end by good deeds,  who are freed from the delusion of attachment and aversion, and who worship Me with full  resolve, and these also strive for liberation from birth and death. This is the Path of Light or  Archaradi Marga (Self-conscious path). Those who follow this Path of Light go to Brahma 
68  
Loka (VII-24). "They realise in full the supreme Brahman, the Adhyatma (Pratyagatma or  Logos), Karma (action); realise Me in the Adhibhuta (physical region), in the Adhidaiva  (region of the Devatas) and in the Adhiyajna (region of sacrifice); realise Me at the time of  departing, steadfast in mind" (VII-29-30). This path is also referred to in Bhagavata, Skanda  VII, Chapter XV-54. This is indeed a noble object in view, but, to use the words of a Great  Teacher, it is after all an exalted and glorious kind of selfishness. The other path (Atomic  path) is referred to in VIII-25 and is called the Dhuma Marga or the Path of Smoke, followed  by Karma Yogins, who perform different kinds of sacrifices and worshipping Me, reach  Swarga (IX-20).  
Lord Sri Krishna impresses on the mind of Arjuna that there is a direct path leading towards  liberation. It is called Raja-Vidya and referred to in IX-2-3 thus: "Kingly Science, Kingly  Secret, Supreme purifier is this; immediately comprehensible, unopposed to Dharma, very  easy to perform, imperishable; but persons having no faith in this Dharma, without reaching  Me, remain in the path of the mortal world." It is the path of illumination, followed by  Jivanmuktas, who, without even caring for their own salvation, wish to be born again merely  for the sake of the suffering and struggling humanity. Bhagavan therefore says to Arjuna: "He  whose mind is attached to Me, who performs Yoga, who takes refuge in Me, without doubt,  will know Me in full." In this connection you will remember what is said in the last  
69 
two verses of the Sixth discourse: "One who has controlled his mind is better than a man of  austerity (performer of different Vritas such as Chandrayana, etc.), better than a Gnani  (teacher of Sastra), better than a Karmin (performer of Agnihotra, etc.). Among all these  Yogis, he whose inner Self abides in Ishwara is the real Yogi." Now what is this Yoga? Lord  Sri Krishna sums up his teaching, in brief, in these verses: "Fix thy Manas in Me, place thy  Buddhi (intellect) in Me; if you cannot fix your thought steadily on Me, then follow Abhyasa;  if you cannot do this, then do Karma for My sake; and even if you are not able to do this, do  thou at least abandon the fruit of any action with a pure mind" (XII-8-11).  
At the initial stage of budding spiritual consciousness, the devotee voluntarily renounces the  fruit of his action even though he is conscious that he is the doer of action. As he offers the  fruits of every such action to Bhagavan with intensity and aspiration, he is slowly drawn  towards Bhagavan, and conceives an attachment for Him which, in due course, develops into  steady devotion and love. He performs Karma as Yajna and for His sake with the object of  pleasing Him. Then he begins to concentrate his mind, having brought it under control and  resisting all external thoughts and stimuli and meditating upon Bhagavan with one-pointed  devotion reaches Him who is in the centre of the Universe. He realises that his physical  centre and the Cosmos are the expression of one and the same Divine life. Such a one,  Bhagavan says, "Who hates no being is friendly 
70  
and compassionate, free from attachment and egoism steady minded self-controlled, with  Manas and Buddhi fixed on Me, devoted to me, is dear to Me" (XII-1314). Such a one  "knowing Me hither as the Sarathi (Charioteer) now knows Me in truth, that is, as Bhagavan".  
CHAPTER X 
KSHETRA AND KSHETRAJNA 
With the thirteenth discourse commences the third part of the Bhagavad Gita. In the second  part the Great Lord, Sri Krishna, explained His doctrine with regard to the path of liberation,  by pointing out the source and end of Evolution, the manifested Cosmos, His own place in  Nature, His Vibhutis, the marks of the liberated, and the steps leading toward the Goal.  
In studying the seventh discourse you find that the Great Lord, while enunciating His  doctrine refers to Jnana as "the knowledge which being known, nothing more here remains to  be known" (VII-2), and declares this knowledge as "that which, having known, thou shalt be  liberated from the bondage of Samsara" (IX-l). It is that knowledge which, you will  remember, Bhagavan says, only those who themselves realised the truth and reached the Goal  could impart, and by which "thou shalt see all beings in thyself and also in Me" (IV-3,6). It is  this knowledge which Bhagavan now explains at greater length in the thirteenth discourse of  the Gita. You see Lord  
71 
Sri Krishna starts by saying, "The knowledge of Kshetra and Kshetrajna' is deemed by Me as  true knowledge" (XIII-2), and expatiates on the same subject, by first narrating what the  Kshetra is, what its attributes are, what qualities it generates, its source, and the reason of its  existence; what Kshetrajna is, and what powers He possesses (XIII-3), and then pointing out  that the possession of this true knowledge, if properly acquired, that is, when the proper  means of attaining that knowledge are adopted, leads to emancipation from the wheel of  Samsara (XIII-23). He then winds up his argument by saying that "They who by the eye of  wisdom perceive the distinction between Kshetra and Kshetrajna, and the liberation of all  beings from Prakriti, the differentiation of Prakriti which is the cause of Avidya or ignorant  delusion, reach the supreme Goal" (XIII-34).  
Now what is this Supreme Goal? Bhagavan refers to it in VIII-3: "Brahman is the  Imperishable (Akshara), the Supreme." It is "that Imperishable Goal which the knowers of  the Vedas declare, which the self-controlled and the passion-free enter" (VIII-11). It is called  the Unmanifested, the Imperishable. That is the highest Goal which having reached, none  return. That is My Supreme Abode" (VIII-2l). This is described in XIII-l2 as "The  beginningless, Supreme Brahman," which is "neither Sat nor Asat"; and more fully explained  in the next four verses (XIII-14-17). It is, to use the language of Western philosophers, the  First Cause, or Parambrahma, the existence of which Brahmavidya, Rajavidya or Paravidya  postulates. It is neither Ego, nor non-Ego, nor 
72 
consciousness, and as such it is impossible for human knowledge to predicate anything about  it. It is the basis of material manifestations in the Cosmos, or the basis of Evolution.  
It is not 'Sat' because the word 'Sat' is generally used to denote Jati (genus), Kriya (act), Guna  (Quality) or Sambandha (relation). Nor can it be 'Asat', for without it there could be no  material phenomena. But for it, the Indriyas could not operate and the power which makes  the senses work is innate in it. It is admitted by physiologists that in evolution the exercise of  functions gradually developed the necessity for the organs, of senses.  
"It is unattached, yet supports everything and is above the three Gunas. It is outside as  well as inside; at the same time it is in the middle. Being very subtle it is very  incomprehensible. It is far away to one who is ignorant, but very near to a man of  knowledge. It is undivided, but appears to be divided in the Bhutas (sensible matter).  At one time it is passive, at another time it is active. It is absolute Jyoti, the Light of  Lights, which cannot be described and is beyond Prakriti." 
It is neither Gnata (Ego), nor Gnanam (consciousness), nor Gneyam (Non-ego). It may be  symbolised as the boundless circle, the Zero (No thing). The Zero becomes a number only  when one of the other nine figures precedes it and thus manifests its value and potency.  
Such description, graphic as it is, of something which defies any description, would indeed  dishearten any person ― at the mere thought of the knowledge of Parambrahma being difficult of  
73 
attainment. So in order to cheer up Arjuna, Bhagavan at once Says in the 17th Sloka:  "Knowledge, the knowable, and the Goal of knowledge (It) is seated especially in the heart of  everyone."  
Thus there can be no manifestation without the First Cause, and all the physical phenomena  that you see, though due to Prakriti, have Parambrahma as their basis. Now you find in the  7th discourse reference is made by Bhagavan to two kinds of Prakriti, one inferior, divided  eight-fold, and the other Superior Prakriti, the very life by which the Universe is upheld (VII 4-5), and that "these are the womb of all creatures, I (the Ishwara) the source and the  dissolution of the whole universe" (VII-6). In human life these refer or correspond to the  Kshetra and Kshetrajna, respectively. Lord Sri Krishna says the true nature of Kshetra and  Kshetrajna is sung by "Rishis in many ways in various chants, in Brahma Sutras which are  logical and definite" (XIII-2). For you find in the Brahma Sutras a clear and consistent theory  of Vedantic philosophy, with regard to the composition of man, as an entity, the nature of the  three Upadhis, and their relation to the Soul" on the one hand, and their connection between  themselves, on the other. The Lord says: "This, the body is called the Kshetra, that which  knows it is called the Kshetrajna; do thou also know Me, Kshetrajna in all Kshetras" (XIII-1- 2). The human body is called Kshetra. It is only when the human body is evolved, Jivatma  enters (Aitareya Upanishad, 1-3-12). So, when the Light of Ishwara enters the human body, it is termed the Jivatma, and the body becomes, 
74  
the field where the law of Karma begins to operate, and the fruits of action reaped. Evolution  begins from Ishwara, while Karma, the law of cause and effect, from Mulaprakriti. Kshetra is  therefore the Upadhi, and Kshetrajna, the ego which works through the mind and senses.  "The great elements, Ahankara, Buddhi, also the avyakta; the ten senses and the one (Manas)  and the five objects of sense; desire hatred, pleasure, pain, the aggregate (the combination of  the body and the senses), intelligence, courage, constitute the Kshetra with its modifications"  (XIII-5-6). The elements referred to here are the Mahabhutas or the five great Tanmatras,  which pertain to the abstract qualities of supersensible (subtle) matter; the Pancha Bhutas  refer to sensible matter in which the variations of the abstract qualities are observed. The  former are generals of which the latter are particulars. Ahamkara is the sense of I-ness, the  false or artificial 'I'. In the course of evolution, Buddhi comes first and presents itself merely  as consciousness without the sense of 'I'-ness, and thereafter comes Aham-kara. Next comes  the mind (Manas) the function of which is Sankalpa (selection) and Vikalpa (rejection). Then  come the lndriyas, the Jnanendriyas and Karmendriyas, and the five gross elements. Desire  and other qualities mentioned here refer to the qualities of the inner sense (Antahkaran). This  illustrates that Prakriti is responsible for the mental and moral qualities of man. Herbert  Spencer says that the physical organism has a great deal to do with the mental structure of  man, and psychology therefore finds a foundation for itself in physiology.  
75 
Bhagavan therefore says "that the body is Kshetra, He is Kshetrajna, and that is the real  knowledge". Our Sages have explained three Upadhis (Sthoola, Sukshma & Karana) and 16  states of consciousness, namely, three Avasthas (states) Jagrat, Swapna and Sushupti, in each  of the three Upadhis, and above these nine, seven other states to which only the Jivanmuktas  have access. The Light of Ishwara permeates every kind of organism, and is manifested in  everyone of the Upadhis as the real ego of man. If you observe a ray of light falling ― on a  clear mirror, and make the ray reflect on a polished metallic plate, and make this reflection of  it in its turn fall upon a wall, you will then see three images, One clearer than the other.  Comparing for a moment, the Sun to Ishwara, and the three surfaces to the three Upadhis,  Karana, Sukshma and Sthoola, you will at once understand that the three reflections of the  Sun, or the light will correspond to the three images (Pratibimbas), for the time being  considered as the self. These Bimbas are not of the same lustre. The lustre of this Bimba may  be compared to man's knowledge and it grows feebler and feebler, as the reflection of light is  transferred from a clear Upadhi to one less clear, and so on till you get to the Sthoola Sarira  (physical body). Our knowledge of the self, therefore, depends mainly on the condition of the  Upadhi.  
The different states of consciousness mean simply this ― that the Atma, or self, observes  different (nine) classes of objects. It is the one observer of the generalisation, which the mind,  that rules and guides the senses, makes from the impressions of the senses, 
76  
when collected and arranged. In Jagrata Avastha (waking consciousness), when a person sees  the objects with the senses and the light of the Sun, etc., and his mind draws deductions from  the impressions of the senses, he is not conscious of the awareness of the self, and so "the self  luminousness is for the beholder difficult to discriminate". In Swapna avastha (dreamy state),  there is self-luminosity, for you create things from the impressions gathered in the mind with  the help of Chaitanya (Sri Shankaracharya's commentary on Brahma Sutras, Chapter III, Pada  2, Sutra 4).  
In Sushupti (dreamless sleep), you become one with yourself. The Light of Ishwara is the  Turiya Avastha, or the fourth state. It is the Atma. According to the ordinary Vedantic  classification, there are four states of Conscious Existence, namely, Viswa, Taijasa, Prajna  and Turiya. These may be described as the objective, clairvoyant, ecstatic and ultra-ecstatic  states of Consciousness. The seats or Upadhis relating to these states, are the Sthoola Sharira  (physical body), the Sukshma Sharira (subtle body), the Karana Sharira (human monad) and  Daiviprakriti (Light of the Logos). The fourth (Turiya Chaittanya, the fourth life-wave) is  Daiviprakriti, which is the real Atma; and is "realised by merging the other three in it in the  order of the lower in the higher." So merge the objective consciousness into the clairvoyant  consciousness, then merge this into the ecstatic consciousness, and lastly the ecstatic  consciousness into the ultra-ecstatic consciousness (Mandukya Upanishad, Sloka 2).  
77 
The fourth life-wave (Maha Chaitanyam) is "the sole Essence of the consciousness of the  self" and indicates the transcendental consciousness "of peace, bliss and unity" (Mandukya,  Sloka 7).  
Let us now look at the activity of the Kshetrajna from a different standpoint, that is, in  relation to the Upadhis, according to the Vedantic classification. In the Annamayakosha there  is the life of sensation. This relates to the Sthoola Sharira. In the Pranamayakosha, there is the  life of desire. In the Manomaya Kosha there is concrete activity, and the mind collects all  sense-impressions and turns them into perceptions and concepts, by Sankalpa (assimilation)  and Vikalpa (differentiation). Here the thinking faculty is highly developed and the person is  not in the world of senses. It is the life of a thinker, scholar, painter, sculptor, musician or  mathematician. Both these (Pranamaya and Manomaya), however, relate to Sukshma Sharira.  But in Vijnanamaya Kosha you have the life of a philosopher, where the penetrative intellect  is developed by study and deep thinking as a result of which abstract ideas are formed. A  western philosopher says, "I exist because I think". In the Anandamaya Kosha is the life of  bliss. After the highest mental abstraction begins spiritual bliss, which is a part of the bliss of  renunciation. The last two Koshas relate to the Karana Sharira, which is so to say the gateway  of initiation. The highest state of Ananda is supreme love and devotion, when the real  teaching of the Guru begins. It is at this stage you 
78  
become serene and quiet. But there is another Kosha, which is the shining golden sheath of  the Great Ones, wherein you realise the true self, the Light of Ishvara, free from Avidya. It is  called the Hiranyamasa Kosha of the Jivanmuktas in which Brahman (Divine Light) ever  shines and which the sun or the moon cannot illumine. (Mundaka II, ii 9-10).  
Real knowledge is, therefore, that which treats of the Upadhis, consciousness and self consciousness, from the lowest Annamaya Kosha to the highest Anandamaya. How do you  attain this Jnanam or knowledge? Sri Krishna says that this knowledge results from the  development of certain virtues or moral qualities as a necessary means of attaining such  Jnanam. These are "humility, modesty, innocence, patience, uprightness, service of teacher,  purity, steadfastness, self-control, unflinching devotion to Me, constancy in spiritual  knowledge and understanding the end of the knowledge of truth" (XIII-7-11). These  attributes are also declared to be knowledge, for knowledge is their end. By this knowledge  you get to know Ishwara, and the knowledge includes devotion as well. Bhagavan now says:  "Kshetra and knowledge and that which has to be known have been set forth; My devotee, on  knowing this, is fitted for My state" (XIII-18). So, when these virtues are  
79  
developed, he becomes, by means of devotion, a Jnani. Devotion is the insatiable thirst of the  human spirit for the divine, a thirst that can never be satisfied either by the reading of  scriptures or the performance of rites or ceremonies; it can be satisfied by individual  experience alone. Says Kathopanishad" 1st Adhyaya, 2nd Valli, 23:  
"This Atma (Paramatma-Supreme Self) is not attainable by the study of the Vedas,  nor by keen intellect (capable of understanding the meanings, conveyed by  
Shastras), nor by great learning. It is attainable by him alone who longs to reach it  and to him this self reveals its real nature."  
Just as food is necessary for sustaining physical life, even so meditation and worship are  needed for keeping up the spiritual life. The physical man must be made more ethereal by  taking, pure food; moral man more self-denying and philosophical; mental man more  penetrating and profound; and spiritual man more devotional. The first preliminary is,  therefore, the purification of the Upadhis, and as man goes on evolving the Koshas, devotion  to Ishwara comes (sets in). The Sthoola Sharira and the Sukshma Sarira are the 'negative  pole', while Daiviprakriti and Ishwara are the 'positive pole'. If Karana Sharira comes under  the attraction of the negative pole, it becomes subject to the passions of embodied existence,  but when it comes under the influence of the positive: 
80  
pole, one becomes liberated. The battle rages when you have to cross the neutral barrier Mahasmashana ― success in crossing which depends entirely on one's past virtuous Karma  and complete devotion to Bhagavan. Out of the personality is evolved the individuality,  which is later on transferred to Ishwara. There can be no Mukti till the Ahankara is  completely annihilated and all evil eradicated by the fire of devotion. "Sweep clean the  threshold of your heart by pure life, garnish the dwelling place of the beloved with virtues;  when thou departest, He enters in and shows His Face to him whose self is gone." At first the  devotee starts as 'Dasoham', i.e., 'I am the servant'. The next stage of devotion is when he says  and feels "He is Mine." Lastly comes the stage Soham", i.e., "I am He, Thou art myself",  when the devotee is in a state of perfect union and oneness with the Beloved.  
In that Parabhakti, the devotee, on account of oneness, feels that what he sees, hears, etc, is  Vasudeva.  
CHAPTER XI 
MULAPRAKRITI DAIVIPRAKRITI AND ISHWARA 
In the early part of this discourse19 it was mentioned that the two Prakritis correspond to  Kshetra and Kshetrajna and that these were the womb of all creatures. The question therefore  arises: how can all beings be said to have been evolved from the two Prakritis? Bhagavan  says: "Whatever is born, the unmoving or moving, know that to be from the union of Kshetra  and Kshetrajna" (XIII-26). Now, the original Kshetra is Mulaprakriti, and the real Kshetrajna  is Ishwara. What then is this union? It is not contact. It cannot be mutual inherence, for they  are not related to each other as cause and effect. Their natures are different. Kshetra is object  while Kshetrajna is subject. The connection, therefore, is of the nature of 'Adhyasa', which  consists in confounding the attributes of the one with those of the other. It is a sort of illusion,  due to Ajnana or ignorance, as when a rope is mistaken for a snake. Sankaracharya says that  if you want to realise the Kshetrajna, you must separate the ego from the body; and when you  begin to realise the real Purusha, Avidya disappears and you attain knowledge.  
If all beings evolve out of the Prakritis, who then is Ishwara? The two Prakritis depend on  Ishwara, who is the source of evolution. "Prakriti and Purusha are both beginningless", says  the Great Lord. Here  
19 Chapter XIII of Gita.
82  
prakriti is Mulaprakriti, while purusha is Daivipraprakriti. They are both beginningless,  because Ishwara is eternal; and the two are under His control. If, as some hold, purusha and  Prakriti have a beginning, then there would be nothing left for Ishwara to rule over prior to  their birth. Nor can Ishwara be held to be the cause of Samsara, because, in that case, the  Muktas will be subject to the same disability of Samsara and there can be no meaning in  Mukti or liberation. Ishwara, therefore, is the source of evolution, while Mulaprakriti is the  cause of Samsara or bondage. That is why it is said that no puja can be performed without  first offering puja to the Peetham (seat of the deity) while Namaskarams are to be made to  both (Mulaprakriti and Daiviprakriti). Prakriti as such cannot be destroyed; what is destroyed  is Avidya that she causes. Sri Krishna says: "All emanations and qualities are born of Prakriti.  In the production of effect and causes (instrument), Prakriti is said to be the cause; in the  experience of pleasure and pain purusha is (said to be) the cause" (XIIl-19-20). In other  words, prakriti is the cause of the body, thirteen instruments (10 Indriyas, Manas, Buddhi,  Ahankara) and five sense objects, and all qualities such as Sukha, Dukha, Moha (or pleasure,  pain, delusion), which are seated in the Karanas or senses, are also included under the term  Karana.  
The other interpretation is that Karyas are sixteen, namely, 10 Indriyas, Manas and 5 sense  objects, while Karana is Mahat, Ahankara and Pancha Tanmatras. At the beginning of  evolution,  
83 
Mahat existed, i.e., vague "consciousness, like the consciousness that comes to the waking  man without the sense of "I"; this is followed by Ahankara and Tanmatras, viz., Shabda  (sound), Sparsha (touch), Rupa (colour), Rasa (taste), and Gandha (smell), as such, being abstract supersensible generals. The Purusha, who is Bhokta, is the Jivatma in the Karana  Sharira, because he identifies himself with Prakriti and enjoys and suffers. Instead of  identifying yourself with Ishwara, you identify yourself with Prakriti (i.e. differentiated  Prakriti, which is Avidya) and attach yourself to the qualities, and the result is Samsara. In  other words, first there is Avidya, or ignorance, due to differentiation or the feeling of  separateness, which causes desire or Kama, which, in its turn, produces Karma or action,  resulting in pleasure and pain, thereby causing bondage. So long as you identify yourself with  the body, your consciousness is in the body, but as a result of evolution, if there is  purification, consciousness is transferred from Upadhi to Upadhi, until at last it is united to  that of Bhagavan.  
But there is another Purusha, who is Bhagavan himself. Lord Sri Krishna says: "I am the  same to all beings; to Me there is none hateful or dear" (IX-29). Bhagavan is, therefore,  simply a disinterested witness (Upadristha) (XIII-22), watching the career of the human  
monad, and not concerning Himself with its interests. But he goes on to say: "I take interest  in the welfare of those men who worship Me and think of Me alone with their attention  always fixed on Me" (IX-22). Then he becomes Anumantha and 
84  
Bharta (supporter); that is, where real spiritual progress is made, he takes greater interest in  the welfare of the individual who is his devotee, and becomes his light and guide, watches  over him, and protects him by giving him knowledge, the light of wisdom (X-11). "To them  who are ever devout, worshipping Me with love, I give Buddhi Yoga (Yoga of right  knowledge of My essential nature) by which they come to Me. I, dwelling in them, out of My  compassion for them, destroy the darkness born from ignorance by the shining light of  spiritual wisdom" (X-10-11). Then he becomes the Bhokta (enjoyer), for "I am indeed the  enjoyer of all sacrifices" (IX-24); "Know Me as the Enjoyer of sacrifice and of austerity" (V 29); and, as Bhokta, He takes from the Soul that portion of its individuality in the Karana  Sharira (into which is garnered the best experiences of each incarnation), which is high and  spiritual enough to live in His own individuality; and when the man reaches the highest  spiritual development, the devotee finds that he is no more a reflection of the Paramatma, but  Maheswara and Paramatma.  
Such a one, says Lord Sri Krishna, "Who thus knows purusha and Prakriti by illumination  escapes the wheel (cycle) of births and deaths, in whatever condition he may happen to be"  (XIII-23) . What are the means of attaining the knowledge of the Atma by which one can  secure liberation? Sri Krishna says:  
"By meditation, some behold the self in the self by the self" (XIII-24). These are the Uttama  Adhikarins. Vedantins come under this class. The Vedantin must possess "Sadhana  Chatushtaya" (four qualifications),  
85 85  
namely, 'Nityanitya Viveka' i.e., discrimination between the real and the unreal, the self and  the non-self; 'Ihaloka Paraloka Vairagya' or indifference to the fruits of action in this world  and the other world (Swarga); 'Shat Sampatti,' i.e., Shama (control of the mind), Dama  (Control of the five organs of knowledge, and five organs of action), Uparati (tolerance),  Titiksha (endurance), Sraddha (faith in the teaching of the Vedanta and the Guru) and  Samadhana (composure); and Mumukshatvam (desire for liberation).  
To man, the world is a mirror to see the self, and is hence the subject of his study. The  scientist studies it by observation, while the philosopher does it by contemplation, and gets to  know the nature of the self. The man first observes the world around him, then recognises the  relation between the sensations and the sense objects, and forms concepts by correspondences  (Sankalpa) and differentiation (Vikalpa) and thus develops his faculties by analytical  thinking. He separates himself from his senses, and listens to the teachings of scriptures  (Sravanam), through the Acharya, regarding the nature of the self. He then studies these  truths and ponders over them by cogitation (Mananam) and when, by mental abstraction and  profound contemplation (Nididhyasa), he grasps the abstract truths through his penetrative  intellect, he becomes convinced of the highest truth, the one reality. Even then the scripture  says to him: "Atma (Paramatma) is not attainable by the study of the Vedas nor by keen  intellect, etc.'; to reach Ishwara there must be the quenchless thirst for Him." Now 
86  
Ishwara is Sabda-Brahman, the word manifest, the Nameless Name. He is transcendental  (Nirguna) but out of pure compassion for us and for the purpose of helping humanity, takes a  human form (IX-11). So when, after study and deep thinking, the devotee begins to  concentrate his mind and fixes it on the image, he goes "from the circumference to the  centre", so to say. By means of Nama, Rupa and Mantra, he transcends, his mind and gets  within, and his centre of gravity is slowly shifted from the head to the heart which now flows  towards Bhagavan, as a stream of oil, continuous and unbroken. For, Sri Krishna says in the  sixth discourse that when the senses become insensitive, and the mind is serene and quiet, the  Antahkarana, which is the bridge between the lower mind (head) and the higher mind (heart),  becomes purified, and Atman, which is the Supreme Intelligence (Chaitanya) and the All resplendent Light of Ishwara, is seen (VI-20).  
The next class of devotees (Madhyama Adhikarins) are those to whom Sankhya Yoga  appeals. It is the Yoga of analysis, by which the aspirant builds up a strong centre of individuality, as described in the second discourse. He dissociates himself from his body, his  senses, feelings and emotions and realises that he is distinct from his sensations and  perceptions and that the pleasures and pains or the joys and sorrows of his life do not affect  the real self, the self whom "weapons cleave not nor waters wet, nor wind drieth, the  unperceivable, the unthinkable and the unchangeable self" (II-23-25). He realises the  harmony of the inner Self.  
87 
There is, then, the third class of devotees who are Karmayogins. They say: "Do Karma for the  sake of the Lord, and carry on the wheel of Samsara for Bhagawan's sake." Lord Sri Krishna  says: "Surrendering all actions to Me with thy thoughts on the self, without hope and egotism  and without anxiety, engage in battle. Those who constantly practice this teaching are also  liberated" (III-30-3l). You see, therefore, that in the devotees of the first class, there is mental  abstraction, and spiritual devotion with the recognition of the Light of Ishwara; in the second  class, though the Light of Ishwara is not recognised, the 'devotee realizes the self which is the  individuality in the Karana-Sarira; while in the third class, the devotee does all action, such as  walking, sleeping, talking; eating, etc. as an offering to Bhagavan and the mind having thus  become purified, the man qualifies himself for Sankhya Yoga. Then there is also a fourth  class of devotees who have no knowledge as to the true nature of the self, but learn this from  the teachers and worship according to their instructions; these too cross the ocean of Samsara  (XIII-25).  
Samsara is due to the union of Kshetra and Kshetrajna, resulting from ignorance. A person  whose eyes are affected, sees many moons, while the man of true or proper vision sees only  one. Even so, owing to ignorance, differences are seen, but the sage sees that all is one. You  must first separate yourself from the limitations, and then eventually realise that all beings  exist in Him. "He sees, who sees the Supreme Lord, remaining the same in all beings, the  Undying in the dying" (XIII-27): Until and unless you see 
88  
unity in diversity, there can be no real knowledge (IV-35). Remember that Lord Sri Krishna  first explained the distinction between the self and non-self and then, out of love, showed to  Arjuna His universal form only after giving him the divine sight, i.e., in Daivi Prakriti, the  Light of Ishwara. Bhagavan says: "He who sees the Lord seated, the same everywhere, does  not destroy his self." He realises that Brahman is the source and end of evolution. He realises  that Karmas are done by the attributes of Prakriti, while Atma is actionless. By the one there  is difference, as a result, while with the other, there is unity. "The imperishable Paramatma,  who is Anadi (having no beginning) and without Gunas, though dwelling in the body, is  actionless" (XIII-3l). Why? The Lord of the World does not create any Karma nor the  conditions for its working (V-14). He disclaims all responsibility for Karma or any of the  effects produced by the three Gunas which are, so to say, the children of Mulaprakriti. Says  Bhagavan in Slokas 14, and 15 of the Fifth discourse: "The Lord of the world does not bring  about or create Karana or the condition by which people attribute Karma to themselves; nor  does He make people feel the effects of their Karma. It is the law of natural causation that  works. He does not take upon himself the sin or the merit of anyone. Real knowledge is  smothered by delusion, and hence created beings are misled."  
"Nor do these acts bind me, remaining like one unconcerned, unattached to those acts" (IX 9). The Self (Atma), seated in the body, is, like the Akasha, unpolluted, though all-pervading.  Like the sun which  
89 
illumines the whole world, the Atma illumines all bodies. The sun's ray is colourless but the  difference in colour is due to the matter on which the ray of the light falls. Even so, the  Jivatma, owing to past experience and different attributes, assumes different characters. He  who realises the whole variety of beings as resting in Him, reaches Brahman, the Supreme  Goal (XIII-30). Lord Sri Krishna concludes His teaching in the last verse thus: 
"Those who know by the development of the inner vision that differentiated Prakriti is  the cause of bondage, will know the real Lord. If you understand the difference between  Kshetra and Kshetrajna by the eye of wisdom, and separate yourself from all Upadhis  and limitations, you go to the Supreme Goal."  
