CHAPTER XII 
WORSHIP ME WITH ALL BHAVAS 
In the fifteenth discourse, Lord Krishna enunciates, in brief, the true doctrine of the Gita with  regard to the real nature of the self, the goal of humanity, and the path leading towards that  goal. Sri Sankaracharya, in his commentary, says that the whole teaching of the Gita Shastra  is here summed up, nay, the whole teaching of the Vedas embodied as well, for it is said that  "knowing this doctrine and not otherwise ― a man becomes wise and has accomplished all  duties" (XV-20). 
90  
While studying the thirteenth discourse, you remember how the Great Lord explains that the  dwelling of the Kshetrajna in the Kshetra and his attachment for the Gunas form the cause of  Samsara ― "Attachment to qualities is the cause of his birth in good and evil wombs" (XIII 
21). In the next discourse He explains what the Gunas are, how they bind him, and in what  way liberation from the Gunas can be attained and concludes by saying that "He who serves  Me with unfailing devotion, crossing beyond the Gunas, is fit to become Brahman" (XIV-26).  The Great Lord now describes the nature of Samsara in figurative terms of the Ashwattha  tree, and says that "he who knows it (Ashwattha) is a Veda-knower." (XV-1). How is this  described? Read Slokas 1 to 3:  
"The eternal Ashwattha with roots above and branches below, whose leaves are the Vedas;  below and above spread its branches, nourished by the Gunas; the sense-objects are its buds;  below in the world of men stretch forth the roots resulting in action. Its form is not perceived  as such here, neither its end, nor its origin, nor its existence."  
This tree of Samsara (Mundane existence) rests on a continuous series of births which is  without a beginning or an end, and is therefore eternal. The tree of Samsara is so called  because it is the tree of knowledge of good and evil. The root of manifestation in the  Cosmos. While Ishwara is the beginning of all creation and the end of all evolution, that  
91 
which keeps up the continued existence of Samsara is Prakriti. From man to the unmoving  objects down below, and from him up to the abode of Brahma, the Creator of the Universe,  whatever regions are attained as the suitable reward of knowledge and action, they are  nourished and fattened by three Gunas, Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, which form their material  basis (Upadana). Mulaprakriti as such is eternal, but when she becomes differentiated, she  gives rise to Avidya. The primary root is therefore differentiated Prakriti, while the secondary  roots are Kama and Krodha, which give rise to Karma (III-37). As the leaves serve to protect  the tree, so do the Vedas serve to protect the tree of Samsara, treating of Dharma and  Adharma, and its fruits, pleasure and pain, the results of past actions, namely, the Vasanas of  attachment and aversion. Samsara is, therefore, necessary for learning the lessons of life;  first, a knowledge of good and evil, which leads one on to abstain from evil and gain wisdom;  and when the duties of life are discharged in a proper manner (III-8) the mind gets purified;  then, by concentration, you bring it under control; and when the penetrative intellect is  developed by cogitation on the eternal verities, you gain illumination through devotion and  secure liberation by reaching Bhagavan. It is then that you understand the root of Samsara  (Prakriti); that is to say, you take objective cognisance of it by reaching the Logos  (Bhagavan) and become Sarvajana, Omniscient.  
So, at the first rung of the ladder, you have the performance of Karma; Karma in thought,  word and 
92  
deed. Selfish Karma binds you and keeps you down, while unselfish Karma elevates you.  Lord Sri Krishna says: "The world is bound by action unless performed for the sake of  sacrifice; so, free from attachment, do thou perform action" (III-9). Again He says: "Do thou  also perform action, as did our forefathers in the old time" (IV-15). So, Karma has to be  performed as Yajna, for "this world is not for the non-sacrificer" (IV-31). In the lower world  this sacrifice is demonstrated by a policy, so to say, of "give and take"; but in Karma Yajna,  you give everything, without expecting anything in return. The scriptures refer to five kinds  of Yajna, namely, Brahma Yajna (study of the Vedas), Daiva Yajna, Pitri Yajna, Bhuta Yajna  and Nra Yajna (Manu Smriti, III-70). Sri Krishna says: "Many and various are the sacrifices  spread at the doorway of Brahman" (IV-32).  
But energy expended in the pursuit of knowledge is superior to ritualistic sacrifices, and  above all is Jnana Yajna or wisdom sacrifice, for He says:  
"All actions in their entirety culminate in wisdom" (IV-33); and "as the burning fire reduces  fuel to ashes, so does the fire of wisdom reduce all actions to ashes" (IV-37).  
The constant enemy of the wise is Kama (III-39), and your enemies in Samsara are two,  Kama and Krodha, pertaining to the senses (III-37) and unless and until these are vanquished,  you cannot get dispassion. How will you do this? Sri Krishna says: "Do your Karma as a  matter of duty, renouncing the fruits of action" (III-19). This is the negative  
93 
aspect of sacrifice. The other aspect or positive aspect of sacrifice, is to do Karma for the  good of all, with an altruistic motive: "Having an eye for the welfare of the world, thou  shouldst perform action" (III-20). This, however, is attended with some danger for it brings in  its train a higher ambition, an aspiration for name or fame, glory or power; and so egoism still  remains latent in a subtle form. This will only disappear when Karma is performed as an  offering to Bhagavan with the fire of devotion. Sri Krishna says: "Dedicate unto Me all  actions with thy mind fixed on the Supreme" (III-30). Thus, by means of Nishkarma Karma,  as well as Karma performed as Yajna or sacrifice to Bhagavan, the mind becomes purified,  but Kama and Krodha (attachment and aversion), which still remain latent, can only be got  rid of by concentration and meditation on Bhagavan as manifested deity (Sakara Upasana);  and as the penetrative intellect is developed by deep study and profound meditation, you get  to recognise the eternal verities, the truths relating to the real nature of the Self, the  Paramatma, and of the Light of Ishwara. It is at this stage, that he realises the true greatness  of the Guru and of Bhagavan. The brain then becomes the generator of great spiritual energy  to be used for the good of all, and He becomes His Warrior, so to say, for the emancipation of  the struggling human souls by dispelling darkness and removing ignorance. Thus, having cut  asunder Kama and Krodha in the senses, mind and intellect, which are the secondary roots of  Samsara, the aspirant has then to seek the Tatpada (Parambrahma), "the goal whither
94  
having gone, none return." How? Sri Krishna says: "Take refuge in the Primeval Purusha  (who is Bhagavan) from whom streams forth the current of evolution" (XV-4). By self surrender and renunciation, aided by supreme devotion, the aspirant gets illumination with  the help of the Guru and the compassion of Bhagavan, and reaches the goal. In the case of  Arjuna, however, Bhagavan was the Guru as well as the Lord. But remember that both are  necessary, viz., the Prasad of the Guru and Divine Grace, and the one cannot be secured  without the other. For, says Yoga Vasishtha:  
"So long as the compassion of Parameshwara (the great Lord) is not secured by complete  devotion, one does not get the real Guru and the true Shastra (Teaching)."  
That goal, Sri Krishna says, is "My Supreme Abode, which the sun, moon, or fire does not  illumine" (XV-6). It is the goal already referred to by Him in the eighth discourse of the Gita  as the "Eternal Brahma, the Supreme" (VIII-3), "the Unmanifested, Imperishable, the Highest  Goal, which having reached, none return. That is My Supreme Abode" (VIII-21). It is the  goal eternal, which those Muktas who are "free from pride and delusion, with the evil of  attachment conquered, ever contemplating the Self, with desires repelled and liberated from  the pairs of opposites", reach (XV-5). 
95 
They have annihilated the Ahankara and reduced it to ashes by burning in the  "Chidagnikunda" (the heart), where dwells the Divine Fire. They are free from delusion  because they have separated themselves from all Upadhis by giving up attachment. They are  free from hatred towards enemies and from love towards friends. They have reached the  Light of Ishwara, and yet they meditate upon the centre of that Light which is the Supreme Self. They are Jivanmuktas and having no desire even for Mukti, renounce it for the purpose  of helping humanity. They reach that goal, when the Jivatma (individual soul) becomes  united with, or assimilated to, Ishwara (Logos).  
What is this Jivatma? Sri Krishna sayst "It is the 'Amsa' that emanates from Me and which is  manifested from the beginning of time, that becomes the Jivatma in the world of living  beings, and attracts the mind and the five senses, which have their basis in Prakriti" (XV·7).  This Jivatma is the spark which hangs from Ishwara, the Flame, by the finest thread of  Daiviprakriti and which is enclosed in the film of Hiranyamaya matter (which is Karana  Sharira). Jivatma is the Light of the Logos, Chaitanyam, which"  
becoming differentiated, forms the individual Ego, in combination with Karana Sharira. Now,  Karana Sharira is so called, "Karana", because it is the father of the other two bodies, Sthoola  and Sukshma. It may also be said to be their child because its growth depends upon the best  experiences which they hand up to it. 
96  
Its growth or development in man is brought about ―  
a. (1) By renunciation of the fruits of Karma (Nishkama Karma);  
(2) By altruistic Karma (Loka Sangraha);  
 (3) Through Karma performed as Yajna or sacrifice to Yajna Purusha, who is  Bhagavan;  
b. Through virtue or the law of self-sacrifice, following which the several virtues  mentioned in Slokas 7 to 11 of the thirteenth discourse are evolved, namely,  humility, sincerity, patience, &c. Because there is in man that spark of  divinity, the nature of which is ever to give, to sacrifice, the law of self sacrifice should govern his actions as opposed to the law of self-assertion, the  latter leading to success or progress in the evolution of the physical universe;  
c. Through deep thinking and cogitation on the truths mentioned in the scriptures; and  d. Through perfect devotion to Bhagavan.  
It is the Karana Sharira which is the seat of human individuality. The Jivatma or the human  monad is the one connecting link between the several incarnations of man. Sri Krishna says:  "When the Lord, Jivatma (human monad), quits one body and enters  
97 
another, he carries with him the mind and the senses as the wind carries the fragrance of  flowers from their source" (XV-8). So, when the Jivatma leaves the body, it takes with it all  the germs of conscious existence, the essence of five Tanmatras, Manas and Ahankara. In  every stage of conscious existence, these seven elements are always present, namely, the five  senses, the mind which guides and rules the senses, and draws deductions from their  impressions, when collected and arranged, and the ego (Atma) or the sense of 'I-ness', which  is the observer of the generalisations deduced from the sense impressions. In dreaming, for  example, objects appertaining or appealing to the senses of sight, touch, etc., pass before the  dreamer; his mind classifies these impressions and the dreamer feels the sense of "I", the  observer. These seven elements exist in the Sthoola as well as the Sukshma, and are latent, so  to say, in Karana Sharira. So then, the Jivatma takes the essence of all these experiences and  the impulses generated in connection with the seven elements of conscious existence residing  in Karana Sharira, thereby forming a kind of energy, as it were, which brings about the future  incarnations (the environments being those determined by the past Karma of the man) and  becomes the cause of rebirth, because the impulses already generated cannot be fructified in  the region of Swarga.  
So, the Jivatma or individual soul, is an integral portion of Paramatma (Supreme Self); it is  like the reflection of the sun in water. (The reflection is but a portion of the real sun, and on  the removal of water, 
98  
it returns to the original sun, and remains as that very sun.) The deluded, however, do not  perceive Him, because they are under the influence of the Gunas, pleasure and pain (Sukha  and Dukkha), and their mind is forcibly attracted by the enjoyment of objects, visible and  invisible. But those in whom the eye of wisdom has been opened do recognise Him (XV-10).  Those who strive, through deep study and deep thinking, endowed with Yoga, i.e., when the  senses are subdued (when the senses are tranquil and insensitive), when the mind is calm and  serene, and when their whole being is steady, see the reflection of the Supreme Self in  themselves, just as one can see the reflection of the sun on the still surface of a lake, when not  disturbed by the wind. But others, who strive to study, but whose minds have not been  regenerated by austerities and subjugation of the senses, who have not abandoned their evil  ways, whose pride of having studied the scriptures has not been given up, do not perceive  Him (XV-11).  
What then are His powers? They have already been mentioned in the seventh discourse (VII 8-l0), and more specifically described in the tenth discourse, where Lord Sri Krishna, after  explaining His vibuthis, concludes by saying: "There is no end of My divine glory;  whatsoever is glorious, good, beautiful or strong, know that to be a part of thy splendour" (X 40-4l). Shri Krishna gives now a brief summary of His powers in the following verses:  "Know that the splendour which belongs to the sun and illumines the whole world, which is  in the moon and in fire, is from Me; entering into the earth, I sustain all  
99 
things by My energy; I am the cause of the moisture that nourishes herbs; becoming fire of  digestion I enter into the bodies of all that breathe and, being united with Pranam and  Apanam, I cause food of the four kinds to digest" (XV-12-14). What Bhagavan says here is  that all the qualities exhibited in matter, as in fire, the sun, light, or any other object,  originally emanated from Him, because it is His light and energy that gives to matter all the  qualities that enable it afterwards to form the various organisms in the manifested Cosmos;  the properties commonly associated with matter and all those tendencies of chemical action  that we see in the chemical elements did not belong to it or them originally. Matter, which is  differentiated Prakriti, becomes endowed with these properties by the action on it of the  current of life, which emanates from Logos or Ishwara.  
This is well illustrated in Kenopanishad, where the mysterious appearance of Parashakti  (Daiviprakriti) in Swarga is thus referred to. It is said that when Parashakti first appeared in  Swarga in a mysterious form, Indra wanted to know what it was. He first sent Agni to enquire  what it was that appeared in that particular form. Then Parasakti asked Agni what functions  he fulfilled or what were his latent capacities. Agni replied that he could reduce almost  everything to ashes; and in order to show that this attribute did not originally belong to Agni,  but was simply lent to him, Parashakti placed before him a little bit of grass, and asked him to  reduce it to ashes. Agni tried his best, but failed. Vayu was next sent; he attempted to blow it  away, but failed miserably. 
100  
All this was done to show that Parashakti, or the Light of the Logos, endows even the  Panchatanmatras with qualities that did not originally belong to Mulaprakriti. The great Lord  then says: "Penetrating the earth, I support all beings by My energy." From the standpoint of  Western science, it is the earth that attracts all bodies by the force of gravity. If so, how do  you account for some phenomena such as levitation? What is true of the macrocosm  (Brahmanda) is also true of the microcosm (Pindanda). The two great forces in nature,  attraction and repulsion, are both included in 'Kundalini' which, according to our scriptures, is  a manifestation of His Shakti residing or latent in the Muladhara Chakra (Sacral Plexus),  which is closely connected with the earth. Another manifestation of the same Light or Energy  appears as "Vaishvanara fire which is within the human body and by which the food is  digested" (Brih. Up. 5-9-1).  
It is for this reason that all the food should first be offered to Bhagavan before it is eaten, so  that the food may become transmuted into higher forces. Then, later on, Sri Krishna says: "I  am seated in the hearts of all", a statement once referred to while explaining His vibhutis to  Arjuna in the tenth discourse (X-20). Here, the heart is the cavity below the Anahata Chakra,  
which is a plexus; and you can find Ishwara, who dwells in it, only when you go within the  heart (Hridaya), or withdraw yourself within yourself, so to say, after transcending the senses,  mind and intellect; and, when aided by pure devotion, you get illumination, as a result of past  virtue and good Karma, you attain a knowledge of things that transcend the ordi 
101 
nary limits of time and space, and of visible nature; and acquire the capacity to get a glimpse  of the previous lives from the Akashic records. Hence He says:  
"Wherefore, from Me, the Self of all sentient beings, are memory and knowledge" (XV-15).  Bhagavan (Divine Voice) is the real Ishwara of the Vedantins and the saviour of mankind.  Through Him alone can salvation and immortality be secured by man. The aim and object of  all Initiation is to ascertain His attributes, His connection with humanity, and realise His  sacred presence in every human heart, and discover the means of transferring man's higher  individuality, purified and ennobled by the virtuous Karma of a series of incarnations, to His  lotus feet as the most sacred offering which a human being can bestow. Therefore, Sri  Krishna says: "I am that which is to be known through the Vedas", because He is the Divine  Voice and He is the author of the Vedanta, being the Paramaguru. Through Him the teaching is imparted to the great Gurus, who form the brotherhood of Adepts; and He knows the  Vedas, as He is the Sabdabrahman from whom the Vedas proceed. "He is the Supreme Self,  the eternal Lord, who pervades the three worlds and sustains them, and in the world and in  the Vedas He is known as Purushottama, because He transcends both the perishable and the  imperishable" (XV-17-18). Here Lord Krishna divides all existing entities in nature into two  classes, those not permanent, Ksharam or perishable, by which is meant the manifested  Cosmos, and Aksharam or imperishable, which is called Kutastha or undifferentiated Prakriti.  This Kutastha is the Mayashakti of the Vedantins. 
102  
It is the illusion-power of the Lord, the germ from which the perishable being takes its birth.  It is the seat of all latent Samskaras or tendencies, of desires, actions, etc., pertaining to  mortal creatures. It is the Avyakta of the Sankhyas, or Mulaprakriti, already referred to as  Kutastha in the 3rd Sloka of the twelfth discourse. Although Akshara is not destroyed at the  time of Cosmic Pralaya (VIII-18-19), as are all things that come out of it, yet there is  something superior in nature to that of Aksharam, and it is the Uttama Purusha (Maheshwara)  or Paramatma. For Ishwara is the beginning of creation and end of all evolution. He is the one  means and the most effectual means of obtaining salvation. Therefore, Sri Krishna puts the  whole doctrine in a nutshell in the last two Slokas: "Knowing Me that I am Purushottama, he  who worships Me with all Bhavas becomes Sarvajna" (XV-19-20). Now this comprises five  Bhavas, namely, Deha-bhava, Indriya-bhava, Mano-bhava, Buddhi· bhava, and Aham-bhava.  How are we to offer these Bhavas to Bhagavan?  
First, take Deha-bhava. The Deha or physical body must be kept pure. There is the statement  in the Bhagavata which says that the acquisition of the human body is a great opportunity in  nature, and that the Devas or other highly evolved beings preferred to accept it, when the  choice was put before them; and as food is necessary to maintain the physical body, the food  to be partaken of must be pure, so that the body may become a temple of Bhagavan, and fit  for receiving His divine influence. The Pure magnetic food is to be taken not for the reason that yourself  
103 
may be kept clean. For says the Light on the Path:  
"The self-righteous man makes for himself a bed of mire. Abstain because it is right to  abstain, not that yourself shall be kept clean."20 Secondly, food must be partaken after  performing one or other of the five kinds of sacrifices, namely, Brahma-yajna, Deva-yajna,  Pitri-yajna, Nra-yajna and Bhuta-yajna. Lord Sri Krishna says: "The righteous who eat the  remnant of the sacrifice are freed from all sins, but the impious who cook for their own sake, eat sin." But of all Yajnas, the best is Japa-yajna, the silent repetition of mantra (X-25.)  Thirdly, we must cease from wicked ways and make the body a fit instrument, by proper  discipline and control, the object being to transmute the physical or brute energy, by steady  devotion, into moral and spiritual force, through the workings of the brain and the heart. The  person who is devoted to Bhagavan may be living in a palace, fed with rich and luxurious  food and surrounded by all objects of gratification, and yet these do not attract him. From  palace to a hovel, from luxury to penury, he moves with equal calm, through riches or  poverty. He is always content with what cometh to him and is homeless (XII-19), as his heart  is always set on Him who is the real home.  
Then there is the lndriya-bhava. The world is the world of Bhagavan manifested, and affects  our senses in different ways. The senses, in their origin and activity, are indicative of the one  life; and the specialisation of the visual and other faculties tends to prove  
20 p. 17
104  
the existence, in the germinal state, of a principle of synthesis, i.e., the presence of a  generalised and universal perceptivity. That shows that there is one Chaitanya, which the  senses can perceive, if only the barrier of likes and dislikes formed between ourselves and the  external world as a result of the taint of personality is removed. These do not appertain to the  objects of the senses. What makes harmonious relations difficult or impossible is the  personality, which is affected by our likes and dislikes. The story of the Sadhu fully  illustrates this: A Sadhu once observed a cow passing in front of him. The butcher who was  following it, came to the Sadhu and asked him if he had seen the cow pass by. The Sadhu was  in a dilemma. He could not speak an untruth; nor could he speak the truth, that the cow did  pass him by, because the butcher was sure to follow and kill her. So the Sadhu calmly said:  "The eyes see, but they don't speak; the tongue speaks but does not see." The butcher could  not understand the parable and asked the Sadhu what it was that sees, speaks, hears, etc. The  Sadhu said that there was one life-Chaitanyam which works through all the senses and shows  its powers. The butcher immediately asked if that life was present in him and in the cow as well. On hearing the Sadhu's reply that it was so, the butcher gave up his pursuit and desisted from killing the cow.  
Then there is the Mano-bhava. This is offered by leading a life of renunciation in the little  things of life. You must strive to live and love the unity in thought, word and deed. You must  not merely preach but practise it by thinking of others first, trying to  
105 
supply their needs first before your own. Your mind must become free from attachment and  aversion. The attachment must expand into universal love. "Bearing no ill-will to any being,  friendly and compassionate, free from attachment and egoism, balanced in pleasure and pain,  and forgiving, ever content, steady-minded, self-controlled, resolute, with Manas and Buddhi  dedicated (fixed on) to Me, such a devotee is dear to Me" (XII-l4). 
As a result of this renunciation and freedom from attachment, the mind becomes pure. You  must then concentrate and fix the mind and meditate upon Bhagavan in the form of a  manifested deity. Just as you catch the rays of the sun's light through a lens and focus them so  as to burn a piece of cotton, even so through such a form you can receive the Light of Ishwara  and burn up all the desires of the heart. Thus meditation, aided by intense devotion, gradually  brings on the longing to reach Paramatma. The devotee's attitude of mind shows a marked  change. First, he begins with Sravana and shows an eagerness to listen to the glories of  Bhagavan; then the devotee takes delight in Kirtana (IX-14), and begins to participate in it  along with congenial or kindred souls (X-9). He then desires to see the form which he  worships, the transcendental loveliness of which surpasses everything in the world. Then  comes Sparsha (touch), when the devotee touches the lotus feet of the Lord by prostration and  feels the oneness or solidarity, became all spiritual influences flow from His lotus feet; then  Ghrana, where the devotee smells 
106  
the fragrance of the flowers which, when offered to Bhagavan, become magnetised by the  Light of Ishwara. The devotee then eats his food after offering the same first to Bhagavan.  This is Rasanam (taste). He also offers by Hasta (hand) flowers and fruits to Him at His feet.  So the mind directs the five senses towards Bhagavan, and the devotee visits the holy places  of pilgrimage which are centres of great spiritual influence charged, so to say, by great  beings.  
Then there is the Buddhi-bhava. By study and cogitation on the truths explained in the  scriptures, the devotee attains knowledge which is to be used for the service of others, so that  they may be brought to His lotus feet. His intellectual conviction grows deep and strong and  as he offers himself to Bhagavan, he begins to realise the inner joy and peace, which  gradually changes his conviction into faith and his intellectual perception into personal  experience, whence true devotion begins.  
Last but not least is Aham-bhava. This is entire self-renunciation or complete surrender to  Bhagavan.  
"Salutation to Lord Shiva, the tranquil, the cause of the three causes (material, instrumental  and efficient). O Supreme Lord, Thou art the goal, I offer myself to Thee."  
In this connection, compare the Sufi couplet: “If you want to float on water, you must die."  Even so, if you wish to float in the ocean of Samsara, the  
107 
personal self of your personality must die. Lord Gouranga says: "Be more humble than grass,  more enduring than a tree as regards heat and cold, and respect others without respecting  yourself. In this way the Lord has to be praised." So Sri Krishna says:  
"He who worships Me with all Bhavas becomes Sarvajna" (XV-19). That is the true doctrine  of the Gita; and the man who knows this and lives up to it becomes wise and happy, for he  may be said to have accomplished all his duties in life.  
This then is the true doctrine of the Bhagavad-Gita expounded in the second part of the book.  Yet we find in the earlier chapters indirect references to it, when the Great Lord critically  examines the theories put forward by the different philosophers with regard to the path  leading towards the Goal. The Bhagavad Gita should not be looked upon merely as a  dialogue between Arjuna and Sri Krishna just before the Great War, but is intended by the  author to be a treatise dealing with the origin, trials and destiny of man. Arjuna, who is also  called by the name "Nara" in the Gita, is the real monad in man, while Sri Krishna is the  Logos or the spirit that comes to save man; and the discourses in the first part of the book will be found to be in orderly sequence and closely interconnected as pointing out the steps on the  path leading the disciple towards the Goal. The first discourse treats of Vishada, which is also  called Yoga, because it is not the passing despondency of the disappointed man but the  deeper sadness felt in the heart, caused by the blankness of his existence and the unreality of  things seen and felt by the separative self in man. It 
108  
describes the position of the Jivatma or monad in man as it enters the threshold of manhood  after passing its stages of irresponsible childhood and of disciplined youth.  
At this stage the Great Lord commences the teaching of the Sankhya Yoga in the second  discourse. It begins with the analysis of man and shows that man is not his body, that  pleasure and pain are fleeting, that the self is "not born, nor doth he die, nor, having been,  ceaseth he any more to be, unborn, eternal, unchangeable" (II-20) . "Just as a man casts off  worn-out clothes and puts on others which are new, so the embodied (self) casts off worn-out  bodies and enters others that are new". So the aspirant should, by analysis, dissociate himself  from his body, sensations and feelings, emotions and thoughts and realise the self. If the  aspirant is not thus capable of realising the self, he should follow Buddhi-Yoga. Let him do  his work casting off attachment and giving up the desire for Phalam (fruit) balanced in mind,  whether success or failure falls to his lot (II-47-48). Sri Krishna says: "Be free from the triad  of the Gunas, free from pairs of opposites, ever remaining in the Sattva self-possessed” (II 45). He will then attain to the disciplined and one-pointed reason by which he will realise the  self which is the centre of individuality in the Karana Sharira. Having realised the harmony of  the self, the Sankhya Yogi begins to trace the Upadhis to their source which is Avyaktam. The theory of the Sankhya school is that Avyaktam is the basis of the differentiated Prakriti,  with all its Gunas; that Purusha is merely  
109 
a kind of passive substratum of the Cosmos, while Prakriti is responsible for all that is done  in the Cosmos, and for all the results of Karma due to Upadhi. Now as you rise from Upadhi  to Upadhi in gradual succession and when you try to rise from the last Upadhi (Karana) to the  Avyaktam, your consciousness is lost and there is no connection that will enable your  consciousness to bridge the interval. This Avyaktam is Mulaprakriti which produces all the  organisms or Upadhis that constitute the whole Cosmos, and the consciousness manifested in  every Upadhi is traceable to the Light of the Logos and not to Avyaktam. It is, therefore,  easier for a man to follow his own consciousness further and further into the depths of his  innermost Being and ultimately reach Logos, than to try to follow Upadhi to its source which  is Avyaktam or Mulaprakriti. Sri Krishna therefore says:  
"The difficulty of those whose minds are set on Avyaktam is great. The path towards  Avyaktam is travelled by embodied souls under very great difficulties" (XII- 5). So even for  him who follows the Sankhya doctrine, the true path when the Karana Sharira is reached is to  lose sight of the Upadhi altogether and to fix his attention solely upon the energy of the Light  of the Logos that is working within it; and, in trying to trace its origin, he will reach its source  which is the Logos, through the Divine Light (Daiviprakriti) and, from the standpoint of the  Logos, try to reach Parabrahma, where he will be able to take objective cognisance of  Avyaktam.  
So when the aspirant has, by Nishkama Karma, purified the mind and by dissociation or analysis 
110  
realised the self and gained the harmony of the self he has still to realise the harmony of the  non-self in relation to the outer world and for this reason the next step of Karma Yoga is  explained in the third discourse. The theory of Karma Yogis is that Karma is not due to  Upadhi alone, but due to the effects produced by the two elements, Upadhi and Chaitanyam,  that Karma cannot be entirely given up, and that if you perform the rituals prescribed in the  Vedas, you will receive the assistance of the Devatas to reach Swarga and in the end you will  attain supreme happiness. Lord Sri Krishna controverts this doctrine by saying that the  Devatas are beings on the plane of the Karana Sharira and can never give you immortality  because the Devatas themselves are not immortal. The happiness in Swarga is not eternal and  you will have to return to objective existence in a new incarnation. He says: "They who  worship the shining ones go to the shining ones, but my worshippers come to Me" (IX-25,  VII-23). So the Great Lord says that Karma cannot be given up but must be performed as  Yajna, or offering to Yajna Purusha, who is Ishwara. "The world is bound by action unless  performed for the sake of sacrifice, for that sake perform action free from attachment" (III-9).  "With an eye to the welfare of the world thou shouldst perform action" (III-10). So, for the  Sankhya Yogi, the only method by which he can harmonise his self with the non-self (the  outer world) is the performance of Karma as Yajna (sacrifice). How? By Bhuta Yajna, the  aspirant develops the virtues of compassion and kindness towards the animal world; by Nra  Yajna, he  
111 
will maintain and establish harmony and goodwill in his relations towards men in their social  and religious life, in as much as his thoughts and actions affect his fellows as members of the  body politic, either for good or evil; by Pitri Yajna, he will be enabled to have better bodies  from the Pitris whose function it is to provide necessary instruments for his evolution; by  Deva Yajna, the powers of his consciousness are harmonised to their sources in the  macrocosm and the centre (the self) is thus harmonised with the Tattvas and their presiding  intelligences; by Brahma Yajna, that is, study of the scriptures, which deal with the (great)  truths revealed by the Great Rishis and by meditating on them for the purpose of helping humanity, he becomes an instrument in their hands for its evolution. Thus, with the help of  the Yajnas a dim realisation of the one life dawns on the aspirant as a result of the desire for  establishing the harmony of the non-self; and he who was a spectator now becomes a co worker with Nature. The Yajna Purusha is Ishwara who is the enjoyer of sacrifices (V-29)  and so the Great Lord says this to the Karma Yogi: "Surrendering all actions to Me with thy  thoughts resting on the Supreme Self, from hope and egoism freed, devoid of fear, do thou  fight" (III-30). So, when the aspirant has realised the harmony of the inner self according to  Sankhya, and maintained the harmony of the non-self in relation to the outer world by means  of Karma done as Yajna (sacrifice) and for the welfare of the world as enjoined in the third  discourse, he becomes fit to receive Jnana as a necessary consequence which is now  explained in the fourth 
112  
discourse. Here the Lord first describes the manifold sacrifices born of action and says:  "Manifold sacrifices are spread at the mouth of Brahman. Know them all as born of action.  But superior is wisdom sacrifice to the sacrifice with objects. All action without exception is  comprehended in wisdom" (IV-32-33).  
The theory of the Jnana Marga philosophers is that all Karma is merely symbolical and  intended as a stepping stone to gain knowledge; that there is a deep meaning underlying the  whole ritual that deals with real entities, with the secrets of nature and all the faculties  embedded in Man's Prajna; that the knowledge of intellectual elements underlying the ritual  would be more important for man's salvation than any physical act could be; and so these  philosophers recommended Japam, Pranagnihotram and other methods as substitutes for  external rituals. Now Lord Sri Krishna says that even this knowledge will not bring the  aspirant any Nearer the Goal, for Jnanam is not directed towards its proper source. There  must be some definite aim before you in your search after truth, a complete view of the path  to be traversed and the ultimate goal to be reached in order that the knowledge gained may  bear fruit. The men of science who investigate into the secrets of nature for the advancement  of knowledge are working almost on the lines of these philosophers but that kind of  investigation and knowledge will not by itself enable a man to attain immortality or Mukti.  Such knowledge is not enough, for Sri Krishna says: "He whose engagements are all devoid  of desires and purposes, and whose actions have been burnt by the fire of  
113 
wisdom, him the wise call a sage" (IV-19). He becomes fit for receiving illumination through  the Light of Ishwara, with the help of the Guru. The true knowledge is that "by which thou  wilt see all beings in thyself and also in Me" (IV-35) ― the knowledge by which all beings  from Brahma the Creator down to the blade of grass are seen in one's real self which is the  Light of Ishwara. It can be imparted by Jivanmuktas forming the hierarchy of adepts who  awaken in the disciple the divine vision (spiritual clairvoyance) and transmit to him the Light  of the Logos. They form the Guruparampara, the highest of whom is described thus:  Dakshinamuti Stotra 12.  
"Ah! the wonder under the Banyan tree, there sits the Guru Deva, a youth, the disciples,  elders; the teaching is silence, and the disciples' doubts are dispelled."  
It is the Light of the Logos (Daiviprakriti) "which keeps up the Guruparampara; for it is the  spiritual light that is transmitted from Guru to the disciple when the time for real initiation  comes. It is the bond of union and brotherhood which maintains and preserves the chain of  
spiritual intercourse through all the Great Jivanmuktas of the world, and to enter into any  such brotherhood, one should bring oneself within the influence of that spiritual Light of the  Logos.  
Jnana is followed by Sanyasa Yoga in the fifth discourse. What is Sanyasa? It is not  renunciation of 
114  
action (Karma Sanyasa) at all. The Lord says that as between Karma Sanyasa and Karma  Yoga, the latter is certainly superior, for you gain all the advantages of Sanyasa by doing  Karma as a matter of duty. Sri Krishna says: "He should be known as a perpetual renouncer  who neither hates nor desires; for free from the pairs of opposites, he is easily set free from  bondage" (V-3).  
"He who, without depending on the fruits of action, performs the bounden duty, he is a  Sanyasi ― not he who is without fire and without action" (VI-l).  
"He who does actions offering them to Brahman abandoning attachment, is not tainted by sin,  as a lotus leaf by water" (V-10). But the true Parammartha Sanyasa is that which is based  upon Jnana (true knowledge) and not merely renunciation of action. When the aspirant  becomes fit to receive illumination, he attains Jnana with the help of Gurudeva and sees the oneness of life through the Light of the Logos. This Light (Daiviprakriti) impregnates the  body, senses, mind and intellect with the powers of automatic activity, so that these (the body  and senses, mind and intellect) may work without his aid.  
Sri Krishna says: "By the body, by the mind, by the intellect, by mere senses also, Yogis  perform action, without attachment, for the purification of the self" (V-11). The Sanyasi who  has subdued his senses, renounces all action, in speech, thought and deed, by discrimination,  rests happily in the body ― a nine gated city, with the self for its monarch, inhabited by  
115 
the citizens of the senses, mind and intellect, all working for the sole benefit of the Lord who  is the real self (V-13). Such a one, self-controlled and intent on the welfare of all beings, rests in Brahma (V-19), which is Turiya Chaitanyam and which is the real Atma (Mandukya  Upanishad, Sloka 7); and in the steady contemplation of Brahman attains Brahman's bliss (V 24). Such a Sanyasi "on knowing Me, the Lord of all sacrifices and austerities and the Great  Lord of all worlds, attains Peace" (V-29). Now, whether for the Sankhya Yogi, the Karmin,  the Jnani or even for the Sanyasi (the sage who wishes to attain Yoga), the control of the  mind is an important factor to be reckoned with; and it was the votaries of this school of  philosophy (Abhyasa Yoga) that recommended different methods by which the mind could  be controlled by man. Sri Krishna says: "The mind is hard to restrain and restless; but by  practice (Abhyasa) and by indifference (Vairagya) it may be restrained" (VI-35). How?  "When a man renouncing all thoughts is not attached to sense objects and actions, then he is  said to have attained Yoga" (VI-4). So, "Little by little, let him withdraw, by reason (Buddhi)  held in firmness; keeping the mind established in the self, let him not think of anything" (VI 25). The Great Lord then gives other directions with regard to the practice of Yoga and  emphasises the fact that these methods are useful for training in one's birth and likely to leave  permanent traces on a man's soul in future incarnations, so that, in the course of many births  he acquires facility in Yoga, little by little, and thereafter reaches the Supreme Goal. But of  such Yogis, Sri Krishna says: "Who,
116  
full of faith, worships Me, with his inner self abiding in Me, he is deemed by Me as most  devout" (VI- 47).  
So Lord Sri Krishna, in recommending his own doctrine, combines all that is good in the  different systems of philosophy and adds to each the necessary means of obtaining salvation,  which follow as logical inferences from the existence of the Logos and its Light, and its right  relationship to man and to the principles that operate in the Cosmos. His own doctrine, as  stated above, is enunciated in the following six discourses and the whole teaching is summed up in brief in the fifteenth discourse. 
