
The author seems to have been himself deceived. The Tântras read esoterically are as full of wisdom as the noblest occult works. Studied without a guide and applied to practice, they may lead to the production of various phenomenal results, on the moral and physiological planes. But let anyone accept their dead-letter rules and practices, let him try with some selfish motive in view to carry out the rites prescribed therein, and––he is lost. Followed with pure heart and unselfish devotion merely for the sake of the latter, either no results will follow, or such as can only throw back the performer. Woe, then, to the selfish man who seeks to develop occult powers only to attain earthly benefits or revenge, or to satisfy his ambition; the separation of the Higher from the Lower Principles and the severing of Buddhi-Manas from the Tântrist’s Personality will speedily follow, the terrible Karmic results of the dabbler in Magic.

In the East, in India and China, soulless men and women are as frequently met with as in the West, though vice is, in truth, far less developed than it is here.

It is Black Magic and oblivion of their ancestral wisdom that leads them thereunto. But of this I will speak later, now merely adding––you have to be warned and know the danger.
Meanwhile, in view of what follows, the real occult division of the Principles in their correspondences with the Tattvas and other minor forces has to be well studied.

 

Page 607

ABOUT “PRINCIPLES” AND “ASPECTS”

Speaking metaphysically and philosophically, on strict esoteric lines, man as a complete unit is composed of Four basic Principles and Three Aspects produced by them on this earth. In the semi-esoteric teachings, these Four and Three have been called Seven Principles, to facilitate the comprehension of the masses.

THE ETERNAL BASIC PRINCIPLES
1. Âtman, or Jiva, “the One Life,” which permeates the Monadic Trio. (One in three and three in One.)
2. Auric Envelope; because the substratum of the Aura around man is the universally diffused primordial and pure Âkaúa, the first film on the boundless and shoreless expanse of Jîva, the immutable Root of all.

3. Buddhi; because Buddhi is a ray of the Universal Spiritual Soul (ALAYA).

4. Manas (the Higher Ego); for it proceeds from Mahat, the first product or emanation of Pradhâna, which contains potentially all the Gunas (attributes). Mahat is Cosmic Intelligence, called the “Great Principle.”†

TRANSITORY ASPECTS PRODUCED BY THE PRINCIPLES
1. Prâna, the Breath of Life, the same as Nephesh. At the death of a living being, Prâna re-becomes Jîva.*

2. Linga-Sarira, the Astral Form, the transitory emanation of the Auric Egg. This form precedes the formation of the living Body, and after death clings to it, dissipating only with the disappearance of its last atom (the skeleton excepted).

3. Lower Manas, the Animal Soul, the reflection or shadow of the Buddhi-Manas, having the potentialities of both, but conquered generally by its association with the Kâma elements.

As man is the combined product of two aspects: physically, of his Astral Form, and psycho-physiologically of Kâma-Manas, he is not looked upon even as an aspect, but as an illusion.

––––––––––
* Prâna, on earth at any rate, is thus but a mode of life, a constant cyclic motion from within outwardly and back again, an out-breathing and in-breathing of the ONE LIFE, or Jîva, the synonym of the Absolute and Unknowable Deity. Prâna is not abstract life, or Jîva, but its aspect in a world of delusion. In The Theosophist, May, 1888, p. 478, Prna is said to be “one stage finer than the gross matter of the earth.”
† Remember that our Egos, the Principle which reincarnates, are called in The Secret Doctrine the Mânasaputras, “Sons of Manas” (or Mahat), or Intelligence, Wisdom.
––––––––––

 

Page 608
The Auric Egg, on account of its nature and manifold functions, has to be well studied. As Hiranyagarbha, the Golden Womb or Egg, contains Brahmâ, the collective symbol of the Seven Universal Forces, so the Auric Egg contains, and is directly related to, both the divine and the physical man. In its essence, as said, it is eternal; in its constant correlations, it is a kind of perpetual motion machine during the reincarnating progress of the Ego on this earth.
As given out in The Secret Doctrine, the Egos or Kumâras, incarnating in man, at the end of the Third Root-Race, are not human Egos of this earth or plane, but became such only from the moment they ensouled the animal man, thus endowing him with his Higher Mind. They are “Breaths” or Principles, called the Human Soul, or Manas, the Mind. As the teachings say: “Each is a Pillar of Light. Having chosen its vehicle, it expanded, surrounding with an Âkâúic Aura the human animal, while the Divine (Mânasic) Principle, settled within that human form.”
Ancient Wisdom teaches, moreover, that from this first incarnation, the Lunar Pitris (who had made men out of their Chhâyâs, or Shadows) are absorbed by this auric essence, and a distinct Astral Form is now produced for each forthcoming Personality of the reincarnating series of each Ego.
Thus the Auric Egg, reflecting all the thoughts, words and deeds of man, is:
(a) The preserver of every Karmic record.
(b) The storehouse of all the good and bad powers of man, receiving and giving out at his will––nay, at his very thought––every potentiality, which becomes, then and there, an acting potency: this aura is the mirror in which sensitives and clairvoyants sense and perceive the real man, and see him as he is, not as he appears
(c) As it furnishes man with his Astral Form, around which the physical entity models itself, first as a foetus, then as a child and man, the astral growing apace with the human being, so it furnishes him during his life, if an Adept, with his Mâyâvi-Rûpa, Illusion Body (which is not his Vital Astral Body); and after death, with his Devachanic Entity and Kâma-Rûpa, or Body of Desire (the Spook).*
In the former case, that of the Devachanic Entity, the Ego, in order to be able to go into a state of bliss, as the “I” of its immediately preceding incarnation, has to be clothed (metaphorically speaking) with the spiritual elements of the ideas, aspirations and thoughts of the

––––––––––
* It is erroneous, when speaking of the fifth human principle, to call it “the Kâma-Rûpa.” It is no Rûpa, or form at all, except after death, but the Kâmic elements, animal desires and passions, such as anger, lust, envy, revenge, etc., etc., the progency of selfishness and matter.
––––––––––

 

Page 609
now disembodied Personality; otherwise what is it that enjoys bliss and reward? Surely not the impersonal Ego, the Divine Individuality. Therefore it must be the good Karmic records of the deceased, impressed upon the Auric Substance, which furnish the Human Soul with just enough of the Spiritual elements of the ex-personality to enable it to still believe itself that body from which it has just been severed, and to receive its fruition, during a more or less prolonged period of “spiritual gestation.” For Devachan is a “spiritual gestation” within an ideal matrix state, that ends in the new birth of the Ego into the world of effects, which ideal, subjective birth precedes its next terrestrial birth––the latter being determined by its bad Karma––into the world of causes.*2 In the second case, that of furnishing the Kama-Rupa for the ghost or spook of the Entity, it is from the animal dregs of the Auric Envelope, with its daily Karmic record of animal life, so full of animal desires and selfish aspirations, that it is furnished.† Now, the Linga-Śarîra remains with the Physical Body, and fades out along with it. An astral entity then has to be created (a new Linga-Sarîra provided) to become the bearer of all the past Tânhas and future Karma. How is this accomplished? The mediumistic “spook,” the “departed angel,” fades out and vanishes also in its turn‡ as an entity or full image of the Personality that was, and leaves in the Kâmalokic world of effects only the records of its misdeeds and sinful thoughts and acts, known in the phraseology of the Occultists as Tnhic or human “Elementals.” It is these Elementals which––upon entering into the composition of the “astral form” of the new body, into which the Ego, on its quitting the Devachanic state, is to enter according to Karmic decree––form that new astral entity which is born within the Auric Envelope, and of which it is often said “Karma, with its army of Skandhas, waits at the threshold of Devachan.”§ For no sooner is the
––––––––––
* Here the world of effects is the Devachanic state, and the world of Causes, earth life.
† And it is this Kama-Rupa alone that can materialize in mediumistic séances, which it occasionally does when it is not the Astral Double, or Linga-Śarîra, of the medium himself which appears. Therefore, how can this bundle of vile moral passions and terrestrial lusts, resurrected by, and gaining consciousness only through, the organism of the medium, be accepted as a “departed angel” or the spirit of a once human body? As well say of the microbe pest which fastens upon a person that it is a sweet departed angel.
‡ This is accomplished in more or less time, according to the degree that the Personality (whose dregs it now is) was spiritual or material. If spirituality prevailed, then the Larva, “spook,” will fade out very soon; but if it was very materialistic, the Kâma-Rûpa may last centuries and––even survive with the help of some of its scattered Skandhas, which are all transformed in time into Elements. See The Key to Theosophy, pp 141 et seq., in which work it was impossible to go into details, but where the Skandhas are spoken of as the germs of Karmic effects.
§ The Key to Theosophy, p. 141.
––––––––––

 

Page 610
Devachanic state of reward ended, than the Ego is indissolubly united with (or rather follows in the track of) the new Astral Form. Both are Karmically propelled towards the family or woman from which is to be born the animal child chosen by Karma to become the vehicle of the Ego which has just awakened from the Devachanic state. Then the new Astral Form, composed partly of the pure Âkâúic Essence of the Auric “Egg,” and partly of the terrestrial elements of the punishable sins and misdeeds of the last Personality, is drawn into the woman. Once there, Nature models the foetus of flesh around the Astral, out of the growing materials of the male seed in the female soil. Thus grows out of the essence of a decayed seed the fruit or eidôlon of the dead seed, the physical fruit producing in its turn within itself another and other seeds for future plants.3
And now we may return to the Tattvas, and see what they mean in nature and man, showing thereby the great danger of indulging in fancy, amateur Yoga, without knowing what we are about.

–––––––––

 

THE TATTVIC CORRELATIONS AND MEANING

In nature, then, we find seven Forces, or seven Centres of Force, and everything seems to respond to that number, as for instance, the septenary scale in music, or Sounds, and the septenary spectrum in Colors. In The Secret Doctrine I have not exhausted its nomenclature and proofs, yet enough is given to show every thinker that the facts adduced are no coincidences, but very weighty testimony.
There are several reasons why five Tattvas only are given in the Indian systems. One of these I have already mentioned; another is that, owing to our having reached only the Fifth Race and being (so far as Science is able to ascertain) endowed with only five senses, the two remaining senses that are still latent in man can have their existence proven only on phenomenal evidence, which to the materialist is no evidence at all. The five physical senses are made to correspond with the five lower Tattvas, the two yet undeveloped senses in man, and the two forces, or Tattvas, forgotten by Brahmans and still unrecognized by Science, being so subjective, and the highest of them so sacred, that it can only be recognized by, and through, the highest Occult Sciences. It is easy to see that these two Tattvas and the two senses (the sixth and the seventh) correspond to the two highest human Principles, Buddhi and the Auric Envelope, impregnated with the light of Âtman. Unless we open in ourselves, by occult training, the sixth and seventh senses, we can never comprehend correctly their corresponding

 

Page 611
types. Thus the statement in “Nature’s Finer Forces” that, in the Tattvic scale, the highest Tattva of all is Âkâúa* (followed by [only] four, each of which becomes grosser than its predecessor), if made from the esoteric standpoint, is erroneous. For once Âkâúa, an almost homogeneous and certainly universal principle, is translated Ether, then Âkâúa is dwarfed and limited to our visible universe, for assuredly it is not the Ether of Space. Ether, whatever modern Science makes of it, is differentiated Substance; Âkâúa, having no attributes save one––SOUND, of which it is the substratum––is no substance even exoterically and in the minds of some Orientalists,† but rather Chaos, or the Great Spatial Void.‡ Esoterically, Âkâúa alone is Divine Space, which becomes Ether only on the lowest and last plane, or our visible Universe and Earth. In this case the blind is in the word “attribute,” which is given as Sound! It is no attribute at all, but the primal correlation of Âkâúa; its primordial manifestation, the Logos, or Divine Ideation made WORD, and that “Word” made flesh. Sound may be considered an “attribute” of Âkâúa only on the condition of anthropomorphizing the latter. It is not a characteristic of it, though it is certainly as innate in it as the idea “I am I” is innate in our thought.
Occultism teaches that Âkâúa contains and includes the seven Centres of Force, therefore the seven Tattvas of which Âkâúa is the seventh, or rather their synthesis. But if Âkâúa be taken––as we believe is the fact in this case to represent only the exoteric idea, then the author is right; because (as Âkâúa is universally omnipresent), following the Purânic limitation, he places its commencement, for the better comprehension of our finite intellects, only beyond the four planes of our Earth Chain,§ the two higher Tattvas being as concealed to the average mortal as the sixth and seventh senses are to the materialistic mind.
Therefore, while Hindu, Sanskrit and Purânic philosophy speaks only of five Tattvas, Occultists name seven, making them correspond with every septenary in nature. The Tattvas stand in the same order as the seven macro- and microscosmic Forces. These as taught in Esotericism, are as follows:

––––––––––
* Following Śaivâgama, the said author enumerates the correspondence in this wise: Âkâúa (or Ether) is followed by Vâyu (Gas), Tejas (Heat), Âpas (Liquid), and Prithivî (solid).
† See Fitz-Edward Hall’s notes on the Vishnu-Purâna.
‡ The pair which we refer to as the One Life, the Root of All, and Âkâúa in its pre-differentiating period answers to the Brahma (neuter) and Aditi of some Hindus, and stands in the same relation as the Parabrahman and Mûlaprakriti of the Vedântins.
§ See The Secret Doctrine, Vol. I, Diagram No. 3, p. 200.
––––––––––

 

Page 612
(1) ÂDI TATTVA, the primordial universal Force, issuing at the beginning of manifestation (or creative period) from the eternal immutable SAT, the substratum of ALL. It corresponds with the Auric Envelope or “Brahmâ’s Egg,” surrounding every globe, as every man, animal and thing. It is the vehicle containing potentially everything––Spirit and Substance, Force and Matter. It is Âdi Tattva that we refer to in Esoteric Cosmogony, as the Force which proceeds from the First or Unmanifested Logos.
(2) ANUPAPÂDAKA TATTVA,* the first differentiation on the plane of being––the first being an ideal one––or that which is born by transformation from something higher than itself. With the Occultists, the Force proceeds from the Second Logos.
3) ÂKÂSA TATTVA. It is at this point that all the exoteric philosophies and religions start from. Âkâúa Tattva is explained in them as the Etheric Force, Ether. Hence the name given to Jupiter, the “highest” god, or Pater Aether; Indra, once the highest god in India, as the etheric or heavenly expanse, Uranus, etc., etc., and the Biblical God as the Holy Ghost, Pneuma, rarified wind or air. The Occultists call the Force of the Third Logos, the Creative Force in the already Manifested Universe.
(4) VÂYU TATTVA (Air-Force), the aërial plane where substance is gaseous.
(5) TAIJASA TATTVA (from tejas, luminous) the plane of our atmosphere.
(6) ÂPAS TATTVA, watery or liquid substance or force.
(7) PRITHIVŸ TATTVA, solid earthly substance––the terrestrial spirit or force, the lowest of all.
All these correspond to our principles, and to the seven senses and forces in man. According to the Tattva or Force generated or induced in us, so will our bodies act.
Now, what I have to say here is addressed especially to those members who are anxious to develop powers by “sitting for Yoga.” You see, from what has been already said, that in the development of Râja-Yoga, no extant works made public are of the least good; they can at best give inklings of Ha˜ha-Yoga, something that may develop mediumship at best, and in the worst case––consumption. If those who practice “meditation,” and try to learn the “Science of Breath,” will read attentively “Nature’s Finer Forces,” they will find that it is by

––––––––––
* Anupapâdaka, in Pâli Opapâtika (Tibetan: Brdus-te-skyas-pa), meaning the “parentless,” born without father or mother, from itself,” as a transformation e.g., the god Brahmâ sprang from the Lotus (the symbol of the Universe) that grows from Vishnu’s navel, Vishnu typifying eternal and limitless space, and Brahmâ the universe and Logos; the mythical Buddha is also born from a Lotus.
––––––––––

 

Page 613
utilizing the five Tattvas only that this dangerous science is acquired. For in the exoteric Yoga Philosophy, and the Ha˜ha-Yoga practice, Âkâúa Tattva is placed in the head (or physical brain) of man; Tejas Tattva in the shoulders; Vâyu Tattva in the navel (the seat of all the phallic gods, “creators” of the universe and man); Âpas Tattva in the knees; and Prithivi Tattva in the feet. Hence the two higher Tattvas and their correspondences are ignored and excluded; and––as they are the chief factors in Râja-Yoga––no spiritual or intellectual phenomena of highest nature can take place; but, the psycho-physiological system being developed simply, the best results obtainable are physical phenomena and no more. As the “Five Breaths,” or rather the five states of the human breath, correspond in Ha˜ha-Yoga to these terrestrial planes and colors, what spiritual results can be obtained? They are the very reverse of the plane of Spirit, or the higher macrocosmic plane, reflected as they are in the Astral Light upside down. This is proven in the Tântra work, Śaivâgama, itself. Let us compare.
First of all, remember that the Septenary of visible as of invisible Nature is said in Occultism to consist of the three (and four) Fires, which grow into forty-nine Fires. This shows that as the Macrocosm is divided into seven great planes of various differentiations of Substance––from the spiritual, or subjective, to the fully objective or material, from Âkâúa down to the sin-laden atmosphere of our earth––so, in its turn, each of these great planes has three aspects, based on four principles, as already shown above. This seems to be quite natural, as even modern Science has her three states of matter and what are generally called the “critical” or intermediate states between the solid, the fluidic, and the gaseous.
Now, the Astral Light is not a universally diffused stuff, but pertains to our earth and all other bodies of the system on the same plane of matter with it. Our Astral Light is, so to speak, the Linga-Sarîra of our earth; only instead of being its primordial prototype, as in the case of our Chhâyâ, or Double, it is the reverse. While the human and animal bodies grow and develop in the model of their antetypal Doubles, it is the Astral Light that is born from the terrene emanations, grows and develops after its prototypal parent, and reflects everything reversed in its treacherous wave (both from the upper planes and from its lower solid plane, the earth). Hence the confusion of its colors and sounds in the perception and clairaudience of the sensitive who trusts to its records––be that sensitive a Ha˜ha-Yogi or a medium. The parallel between the Esoteric and the Tântra Tables of the Tattvas in relation to Sounds and Colors shows this very clearly in the accompanying table.
Such, then, is the occult science on which the modern ascetics and

 

Page 614



 

Page 615
Yogis of India base their soul development and powers. They are known as the Ha˜ha-Yogis. Now, the science of Ha˜ha-Yoga rests upon the “suppression of breath,” or Prânâyâma, to which exercise our Masters, are unanimously opposed. For what is Prânâyâma? Literally translated, it means the “death of (vital) breath.” Prâna, as said, is not Jîva, the eternal fount of life immortal, nor is it connected in any way with Pranava, as some think, for Pranava is a synonym of AUM in a mystic sense. All that has ever been taught publicly and clearly about it is to be found in “Nature’s Finer Forces.” If such directions, however, are followed, they can only lead to black magic and mediumship. Several impatient Chelas, whom we knew personally in India, went in for the practice of Ha˜ha-Yoga, notwithstanding our warnings. Of these, two developed consumption, of which one died; the others became almost idiotic; another committed suicide; and one developed into a regular Tântrika, a black magician, but his career, fortunately for himself, was cut short by death.
The science of the five breaths––the moist, the fiery, the airy, etc., etc.––has a twofold significance and two applications. By the Tântrikas it is accepted literally, as relating to the regulation of the vital, lung breath, but by the ancient Râja-Yogis as referring to the mental or “will” breath, which alone leads to the highest clairvoyant powers, to the function of the Third Eye and the acquisition of the true Râja-Yoga occult powers. The difference between the two is enormous. The former, as shown, use the five lower Tattvas; the latter begin by using the three higher alone––for mental and will development––and the rest only when they have completely mastered the three; hence, they use only one (Âkâúa Tattva) out of the Tântric five. As well said in the above stated work, “Tattvas are the modifications of Svara.” Now, the Svara is the root of all sound, the substratum of the Pythagorean music of the spheres, Svara being that which is beyond spirit, in the modern acceptation of the word––the spirit of the spirit, or as very properly translated, the “current of the life wave,” the emanation of the One Life. The Great Breath spoken of in Volume I of The Secret Doctrine is ÂTMAN, the etymology of which is “eternal motion.” Now, while the ascetic-chela of our school follows carefully, for his mental development, the process of the evolution of the Universe, that is, proceeds from universals to particulars, the Ha˜ha-Yogi reverses the conditions and begins by sitting for the suppression of his (vital) breath. And if, as Hindu philosophy teaches, at the beginning of cosmic evolution, “Svara threw itself into the form of Âkâúa,” and thence successively into the forms of Vâyu (air), Agni (fire), Âpas (water), and Prithivî (solid matter),* then it stands to reason that we have to begin by the
––––––––––
* See The Theosophist, Vol. IX, February 1888, p. 276.
––––––––––

 

Page 616
higher supersensuous Tattvas. The Râja-Yogi does not descend on the planes of substance beyond Sûkshma (subtle matter); while the Ha˜ha-Yogi develops and uses his powers only on the material plane. A good proof of this is found in the fact that the Tântrika locates the three “Nâdis,” (Sushumna, Idâ, and Pingala) in the medulla oblongata, the central line of which he calls Sushumna, and the right and left divisions, Pingala and Idâ––and also the heart, to the divisions of which he applies the same names. The Trans-Himâlayan school, of the ancient Indian Râja-Yogis, with which the modern Yogis of India have little to do, locates Sushumna, the chief seat of these three Nâdis, in the central tube of the spinal cord, and Idâ and Pingala on its left and right sides. Sushumna is the Brahmadanda. It is that tube (of the two along the spinal cord) of the use of which physiology knows no more than it does of the spleen and the pineal gland. Idâ and Pingala are simply the sharp and flat of that Fa (of human nature), the keynote and the middle key in the scale of the septenary harmony of the principles––which, when struck in a proper way, awakens the sentries on both sides, the spiritual Manas and the physical Kâma, and subdues the lower through the higher. But this effect has to be produced by exercise of will-power, not through the scientific or trained suppression of the breath. Take a transverse section of the spinal cord, and you will find that the shaded parts show sections across the tube, the one side of which tube transmits the volitional orders, and the other a life current of Jîva––not of Prâna, sent down to animate the lower extremities of man––during what is called Samâdhi and like states.

He who has studied both systems, the Ha˜ha and Râja-Yoga, finds an enormous difference between the two: one is purely psycho-physiological, the other purely psycho-spiritual. The Tântrists do not seem to go higher than the six visible and known plexuses, with each of which they connect the Tattvas; and the great stress they lay on the chief of these, the Mûladhâra Chakra (the sacral plexus), shows the material and selfish bent of their efforts towards the acquisition of powers. Their five Breaths and five Tattvas are chiefly concerned with the prostatic, epigastric, cardiac, and laryngeal plexuses. Almost ignoring the Agneya, they are positively ignorant of the synthesizing pharyngeal plexus. But with the followers of the old school it is different. We begin with the mastery of that organ which is situated at the base of the brain, in the pharynx, and called by Western anatomists the Pituitary Body. In the series of the objective cranial organs, corresponding to the subjective Tattvic principles, it stands to the “Third Eye” (Pineal Gland) as Manas stands to Buddhi; the arousing and awakening of the Third Eye must be performed by that vascular organ, that insignificant little body,

 

Page 617
of which, once again, physiology knows nothing at all. The one is the Energizer of WILL, the other that of Clairvoyant Perception.
Those among the students of the E.S.T. who are physicians, physiologists, etc., will understand me better than the rest in the following explanation.
Now, as to the functions of the Pineal Gland, or Conarium, and of the Pituitary Body, we find no explanations vouchsafed by the standard authorities. Indeed, on looking through the works of the greatest specialists, it is curious to observe how much confused ignorance on the human vital economy, physiological as well as psychological, is openly confessed. In fact, the following is all that can be gleaned from the authorities upon these two important organs.
(1) The Pineal Gland, or Conarium, is a rounded, oblong body, from three to four lines long, of a deep reddish grey, connected with the posterior part of the third ventricle of the brain. It is attached at its base by two thin medullary cords, which diverge forward to the Optic Thalami (or the posterior cerebral ganglia). Remember that the latter are found by the best physiologists to be the organs of reception and condensation of the most sensitive and sensorial incitations from the periphery of the body (according to Occultism, from the periphery of the Auric Egg, which is our point of communication with the higher, universal Planes). We are further told that the “two bands of the Optic Thalami, which are inflected to meet each other, unite on the median line, where they become the two Peduncles of the Pineal Gland.”
(2) The Pituitary Gland, or Hypophysis Cerebri, is a small and hard body about six lines broad, three long and three high. It is always formed of an anterior bean-shape, and a posterior and more rounded lobe, which are uniformly united. Its component parts, we are told, are almost identical with those of the Pineal Gland; yet not the slightest connection can be traced between the two. To this, however, Occultists take exception; they know that there is a connection, and this even anatomically and physically. Dissectors, on the other hand, have to deal with corpses; and, as they themselves admit, brain-matter, of all tissues and organs, collapses and changes form the soonest––in fact, a few minutes after death. When, then, the pulsating life which expanded the mass of the brain, filled all its cavities and energized all its organs, vanishes, the cerebral mass shrinks into a sort of pasty condition, and once open passages become closed. But the contraction and even interblending of parts in this process of shrinking, and the subsequent pasty state of the dead brain, do not imply that there is no connection between these two glands before death. In point of fact, as Professor Owen has shown, a connection as objective as a groove and tube, exists in the crania of the human foetus and of certain fishes. When

 

Page 618
a man is in his normal condition, the introspective Adept can see the golden Aura pulsating in both the glands, a pulsation, like that of the heart, never ceasing throughout life. This motion, however, under the abnormal condition of effort to develop clairvoyant faculties, becomes intensified, and the Aura takes on a stronger vibratory and pulsating or swinging action. The arc (of the Pituitary Gland) mounts upward, more and more, toward the Pineal Gland, until finally the current striking it, just as when the electric current strikes some solid object, the dormant organ is awakened and set all aglowing with the pure Âkâúic Fire. This is the psycho-physiological illustration of two organs on the physical plane, which are the concrete symbols of, and represent respectively, the metaphysical concepts called Manas and Buddhi. The latter, in order to become conscious on this plane, needs the more differentiated fire of Manas; but once the sixth sense has awakened the seventh, the light which radiates from it illuminates the fields of infinitude: for a brief space of time, man becomes omniscient; the Past and the Future, Space and Time, disappear and become for him the Present. If an Adept, he will store that knowledge he thus gains, in his physical memory and nothing––save the crime of indulging in Black Magic––can obliterate the remembrance of it. If only a Chela, portions alone of the whole truth will impress themselves on his memory, and he will have to repeat the process for years, never allowing one speck of impurity to stain him mentally or physically, before he becomes a fully initiated Adept.
It may seem strange, almost incomprehensible, that the chief success in Gupta-Vidyâ, or Occult Knowledge, should depend upon such flashes of clairvoyance, and that the latter should depend in man, on two insignificant, almost imperceptible excrescences in his cranial cavity, “two horny warts covered with grey sand (acervulus cerebri),” as expressed by Bichat in his Traité d’Anatomie Descriptive; yet so it is. But this sand is not to be despised; nay, in truth, it is only this landmark of the internal, independent activity of the Conarium (Pineal Gland) that prevents physiologists from classifying it with the absolutely useless atrophied organs, the relics of a previous and now utterly changed anatomy of man during some period of his unknown evolution. This “sand” is very mysterious, and baffles the inquiry of every materialist. In the cavity on the anterior surface of this gland, in young persons only, and in its substance, in people of advanced years, is found “a yellowish substance, semi-transparent, brilliant and hard, the diameter of which does not exceed half a line.”* Such is the acervulus cerebri
––––––––––
* S.T. von Sömmerring, De acervulo cerebri (1785), Vol. III, p. 322.
––––––––––

 

Page 619
This brilliant “sand” is the concretion of the gland itself, so say the physiologists. Perhaps not, we answer. The Pineal Gland is that which the Eastern Occultist calls Devaksha, the “Divine Eye,” or the “Third Eye.” To this day, it is the chief and foremost organ of spirituality in the human brain, the seat of genius, the magical Sesame uttered by the purified Will of the mystic, which opens all the avenues of truth for him who knows how to use it. The Esoteric Science teaches that Manas, the Mind Ego, does not accomplish its full union with the child before he is six or seven years of age, before which period, even according to the canon of the Church and Law, no child is deemed responsible.* Manas becomes a prisoner, one with the body, only at that age. Now, a strange thing was observed in several thousand cases by the famous German anatomist Wengel. With a few extremely rare exceptions, this “sand,” or golden-colored concretion, is found only in subjects after the completion of their seventh year; and it is absent in the head of children under six years. In the case of fools these calculi are very few; in congenital idiots they are completely absent. Morgagni,† Greding,‡ and Günz§ were wise men in their generation, and are wise men today, since they are the only physiologists, so far, who connect these calculi with mind. For, sum up the facts, that they are absent in young children, in very old people, and in idiots, and the unavoidable conclusion will be that they must be connected with mind.
Now, since every mineral, vegetable and other atom is only a concretion of crystallized Spirit, or Âkâúa, the Universal Soul, why, asks Occultism, should the fact that these concretions of the Pineal Gland are, upon analysis, found to be composed of animal matter, phosphate of lime and carbonate, serve as an objection to the statement that they are the result of the work of mental electricity upon surrounding matter?
Our seven Chakras are all situated in the head, and it is these Master Chakras which govern and rule the seven (for there are seven) principal plexuses in the body, and the forty-two minor ones to which Physiology refuses that name. The fact that no microscope can detect such centres on the objective plane goes for nothing; no microscope has ever yet detected, nor ever will, the difference between the “motor” and “sensory” nerve-tubes, the conductors of all our bodily and psychic sensations; and yet physiological logic alone would show that such difference

––––––––––
* In the Greek Eastern Church no child is allowed to go to confession before the age of seven, after which he is considered to have reached the age of reason.
† G. B. Morgagni, De sedibus, et causis morborum, etc., Vol XII.
‡ J. E. Greding, Adversaria medica practica.
§ J. G. Günz, Prolusio capillos glandulae pinealis in quinque mente alienatis proponit, Lipsiae, 1753.
––––––––––

 

Page 620
exists. And if the term plexus, in this application, does not represent to the Western mind the idea conveyed by the term of the anatomist, then call them Chakras or Padmas, or the Wheels, the Lotus Hearts and Petals. Remember that Physiology, imperfect as it is, shows septenary groups all over the exterior and interior of the body; the seven head orifices, the seven “organs” at the base of the brain, the seven plexuses (the pharyngeal, laryngeal, cavernous, cardiac, epigastric, prostatic, and the sacral plexus), etc., etc.
When the time comes, the members of the E.S.T. will be given the minute details about the Master Chakras and taught to use them; till then, less difficult subjects have to be learned. If asked whether the seven plexuses, or Tattvic centres of action, are the centres where the seven rays of the Logos vibrate, I answer in the affirmative, simply remarking that the rays of the Logos vibrate in every atom, for the matter of that.
In The Secret Doctrine it is almost revealed that the “Sons of Fohat” are the personified forces known, in a general way as Motion, Sound, Heat, Light, Cohesion, Electricity (or Electric) Fluid, and Nerve Force (or Magnetism). This truth, however, cannot teach the student to attune and moderate the Kundalini of the Cosmic plane with the vital Kundalini, the Electric Fluid with the Nerve Forces, and unless he does so, he is sure to kill himself; for the one travels at the rate of about 90 feet, and the other at the rate of 115,000 leagues a second. The seven Śaktis respectively called Para Śakti, Jnâna-Śakti, etc., etc., are synonymous with the “Sons of Fohat,” for they are their female aspects. At the present stage, however, as their names would only be confusing to the Western student, it is better to remember the English equivalents as translated above. As each force is septenary, their sum is, of course, forty-nine.
The question now mooted in Science, whether a sound is capable of calling forth impressions of light and color in addition to its natural sound impressions, has been answered by Occult Science ages ago. Every impulse or vibration of a physical object producing a certain vibration of the air––that is, causing the collision of physical particles, the sound of which is capable of affecting the ear––produces at the same time a corresponding flash of light, which will assume some particular color. For, in the realm of hidden Forces, an audible sound is but a subjective color; and a perceptible color, but an inaudible sound; both proceed from the same potential substance, which Physicists used to call ether, and now refer to under various other names; but which we call plastic, though invisible, SPACE. This may appear a paradoxical hypothesis, but facts are there to prove it. Complete deafness, for instance does not preclude the possibility of discerning sounds; and

 

Page 621
medical science has several cases on record which prove that these sounds are received by, and conveyed to, the patient’s organ of sight, through the mind, under the form of colored chromatic impressions. The very fact that the intermediate tones of the chromatic musical scale were formerly written in colors, shows an unconscious reminiscence of the ancient occult teaching that color and sound are two out of the seven correlative aspects, on our plane, of one and the same thing, viz. Nature’s first differentiated Substance.
