
The personal “soul” in this case––viz. in that of one who has never a thought unconnected with the animal self, having nothing to transmit to the Higher, or to add to the sum of the experiences from past incarnations which its memory is to preserve throughout eternity––this personal soul becomes separated from the Ego. It can graft nothing of Self on that eternal trunk whose sap throws out millions of personalities, like so many leaves from its branches, leaves which wither and die and fall at the end of their season. These personalities bud, blossom forth

 

Page 633
and expire, some without leaving a trace behind, others after commingling their own life with that of the parent stem. It is the “souls” of the former class that are doomed to annihilation, or Avichi, a state so incorrectly understood and still worse described by some Theosophical writers, but which is in fact not only located on our earth, but is this very earth itself.
Thus we see that Antaskarana has been destroyed before the lower man had an opportunity of assimilating the Higher and becoming at one with it; and therefore the Kâmic “Soul” becomes a separate entity, to live henceforth––for a short or long period, according to its Karma––as a “soulless” creature.
But before I elaborate this question, I must explain more clearly the meaning and functions of the Antaskarana. As already said, it is represented in Plate I as a narrow strip connecting the Higher and the lower Manas. If you look at the Glossary of The Voice of the Silence, pp. 88 and 89, you will find that it is a projection of the lower Manas, or, rather, the link between the latter and the Higher Ego, or between the human and the divine or spiritual Soul.* “At death it is destroyed as a path, or medium of communication, and its remains survive as Kâma-Rûpa”––the “shell.” It is this which the Spiritualists see sometimes appearing in the séance rooms as materialized “forms,” which they foolishly mistake for the “Spirits of the Departed.”† So far is this from being the case, that in dreams, though Antaskarana is there, the personality is only half awake; therefore Antaskarana is said to be drunk or insane during our normal sleeping state. If such is the case during the periodical death (sleep), of the living body, one may judge of what the consciousness of Antaskarana becomes when it has been transformed after the “eternal sleep” into Kâma-Rûpa.
But to return. In order not to confuse the mind of the student with the abstruse difficulties of Indian metaphysics, let him view the lower Manas or Mind, as the personal Ego during the waking state, and as Antaskarana only during those moments when it aspires towards its higher half, and thus becomes the medium of communication between the two. It is for this reason that it is called “Path.” Now, when a limb or organ belonging to the human physical organism is left in disuse, it becomes weak and finally atrophies; so also is it with any

––––––––––
* As the author of Esoteric Buddhism and The Occult World called Manas the Human Soul, and Buddhi the Spiritual Soul, I have left these terms unchanged in the Voice, seeing that it was a book intended for the public.
† In the exoteric teachings of Râja-Yoga, Antaskarana is called the inner organ of perception, and is divided into four parts: the (lower) Manas, Buddhi (reason), Ahaˆkâra (personality), and Chitta (selfishness). It also, together with several other organs, forms a part of Jîva, Soul, called also Lingadeha. Esotericists, however, must not be misled by this popular version.
––––––––––

 

Page 634
mental faculty; hence the atrophy of the lower mind-function, called Antaskarana, becomes comprehensible in both completely materialistic natures and those of depraved people.
According to esoteric philosophy, however, the teaching is as follows. Seeing that the faculty and function of Antaskarana is as necessary as the medium of the ear for hearing, or that of the eye for seeing, so long as the feeling of Ahamkâra (of the personal “I” or selfishness) is not entirely crushed out in a man, and the lower mind not entirely merged into and become one with the Higher (Buddhi Manas), it stands to reason that to destroy Antaskarana is like destroying a bridge over an impassable chasm: the traveller can never reach the goal on the other shore. And here lies the difference between the exoteric and the esoteric teaching. The former makes Vedânta state that so long as Mind (the lower) clings through Antaskarana to Spirit (Buddhi-Manas), it is impossible for it to acquire true spiritual Wisdom, Jñâna, and that this can only be attained by seeking to come en rapport with the Universal Soul (Âtman); that, in fact, it is by ignoring the Higher Mind altogether that one reaches Râja-Yoga. We say that it is not so. No single rung of the ladder leading to knowledge can be skipped. No personality can ever reach or bring itself into communication with Âtman, except through Buddhi-Manas; to try and become a Jîvanmukta or a “Mahâtma,” before one has become an Adept or even a Naljor (a sinless man) is like trying to reach Ceylon from India without crossing the sea. Therefore we are told that if we destroy Antaskarana before the personal is absolutely under the control of the impersonal Ego, we risk to lose the latter and be severed forever from it, unless indeed we hasten to reëstablish the communication by a supreme and final effort.
It is only when we are indissolubly linked with the essence of the divine Mind, that we have to destroy Antaskarana. “Like as a solitary warrior pursued by an army, seeks refuge in a stronghold; to cut himself off from the enemy, he first destroys the drawbridge, and then only commences to destroy the pursuer; so must the Srotâpanna act before he slays Antaskarana.” Or, as an occult axiom has it: “The unit becomes three, and three generate four. It is for the latter (the quaternary) to rebecome three, and for the divine three to expand into the Absolute One.” Monads (which become duads on the differentiated plane, to develop into triads during the cycle of incarnations), even when incarnated, know neither Space nor Time, but are diffused through the lower principles of the quaternary, being omnipresent and omniscient in their nature. But this omniscience is innate, and can manifest its reflected light only through that which is at least semi-terrestrial or material; even as the physical brain which, in its turn,

 

Page 635
is the vehicle of the lower Manas enthroned in Kâma-Rûpa. And it is this which is gradually annihilated in cases of “second death.”
But such annihilation––which is in reality the absence of the slightest trace of the doomed soul from the eternal MEMORY, and therefore signifies annihilation in eternity––does not mean simply discontinuation of human life on earth, for earth is AVICHI, and the worst Avichi possible. Expelled forever from the consciousness of the Individuality (the reincarnating Ego), the physical atoms and psychic vibrations of the now separate personality are immediately reincarnated on the same earth, only in a lower and still more abject creature, a human being only in form, doomed to Karmic torments during the whole of its new life. Moreover, if it persists in its criminal or debauched course, it will suffer a long series of such immediate reincarnations.
Here two questions present themselves: (1) What becomes of the Higher Ego in such cases? (2) What kind of an animal is a human creature born soulless?
Before answering these two very natural queries, I have to draw the attention of all of you who are born in Christian countries to the fact that the romance of the vicarious atonement and mission of Jesus, as it now stands, was drawn or borrowed by some too liberal Initiates from the mysterious and weird tenet of the earthly experiences of the reincarnating Ego. The latter is indeed the sacrificial victim of, and through, his own Karma in previous Manvantaras, who takes upon himself voluntarily though unwillingly the duty of saving what would be otherwise soulless men or personalities. Eastern truth is thus more philosophical and logical than Western fiction. The Christos (Buddhi-Manas) of each man is not quite an innocent and sinless God, though in one sense it is the “Father,” being of the same essence with the Universal Spirit, and at the same time the “Son,” for Manas is the second remove from the “Father.” By incarnation the Divine Son makes himself responsible for the sins of all the personalities which he will inform. This he can do only through his proxy or reflection, the Lower Manas. This, then, is what happens when it has to break off from the personality. It is the only case in which the Divine Ego can escape individual penalty and responsibility as a guiding principle, because matter, with its psychic and astral vibrations, is then, by the very intensity of its combinations, placed beyond the control of the EGO. “Apophis, the Dragon,” having become the conqueror, the reincarnating Manas, separating itself gradually from its tabernacle, breaks finally asunder from the psycho-animal Soul.
Thus, in answer to the first question, I say:
(1) The Divine Ego does one of two things: either (a) it recommences immediately under its own Karmic impulses a fresh series of

 

Page 636
incarnations; or (b) it seeks and finds refuge in the “bosom of the Mother,” Alaya, the Universal Soul, of which the Manvantaric aspect is Mahat. Freed from the life impressions of the personality, it merges into a kind of interlude of Nirvana, wherein there can be nothing but the eternal Present, which absorbs the Past and Future. Bereft of the “laborer,” both field and harvest now being lost, the Master, in the infinitude of his thought, naturally preserves no recollection of the finite and evanescent illusion which had been his last personality. The latter, then, is indeed annihilated.
(2) The future of the Lower Manas is more terrible, and still more terrible to humanity than to the now animal man. It sometimes happens that after the separation the exhausted Soul, now become supremely animal, fades out in Kâma-Loka, as do all other animal souls. But seeing that the more material the human mind, the longer it lasts, in that intermediate stage, it frequently happens that after the actual life of the soulless man is ended, he is again and again reincarnated into new personalities, each one more abject than the other. The impulse of animal life is too strong; it cannot wear itself out in one or two lives only. In rarer cases, however, something far more dreadful may happen. When the lower Manas is doomed to exhaust itself by starvation; when there is no longer hope that even a remnant of a lower light will, owing to favorable conditions––say, even a short period of spiritual aspiration and repentance––attract back to itself its Parent Ego, then Karma leads the Higher Ego back to new incarnations. In this case the Kâma-Mânasic spook may become that which we call in Occultism the “Dweller on the Threshold.” This “Dweller” is not like that which is described so graphically in Zanoni, but an actual fact in nature and not a fiction in romance, however beautiful the latter may be. Bulwer must have got the idea from some Eastern Initiate. Our “Dweller,” led by affinity and attraction, forces itself into the astral current, and through the Auric Envelope of the new tabernacle inhabited by the Parent Ego, and declares war to the lower light which has replaced it. This, of course, can only happen in the case of the moral weakness of the personality so obsessed. No one strong in his virtue, and righteous in his walk of life, can risk or dread any such thing; but only those depraved in heart. Robert Louis Stevenson had a glimpse of a true vision indeed when he wrote his Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde. His story is a true allegory. Every Chela would recognize in it a substratum of truth, and in Mr. Hyde a “Dweller,” an obsessor of the personality, the tabernacle of the “Parent Spirit.”
“This is a nightmare tale!” I was often told by one, now no more in our ranks, a person who had a most pronounced “Dweller,” a “Mr. Hyde,” as an almost constant companion. “How can such a process take

 

Page 637
place without one’s knowledge?” It can and does so happen, and I have almost described it once before in The Theosophist. “The Soul, the Lower Mind, becomes as a half animal principle almost paralyzed with daily vice, and grows gradually unconscious of its subjective half, the Lord, . . . one of the mighty Host”; and “in proportion to the rapid sensuous development of the brain and nerves, sooner or later, it (the personal Soul) finally loses sight of its divine mission on earth.” Truly, “like the vampire, the brain feeds and lives and grows in strength at the expense of its spiritual parent . . . and the personal half-unconscious Soul becomes senseless, beyond hope of redemption. It is powerless to discern the voice of its ‘God.’ It aims but at the development and fuller comprehension of natural, earthly life; and thus can discover but the mysteries of physical nature. . . . It begins by becoming virtually dead, during the life of the body; and ends by dying completely––that is, by being annihilated as a complete immortal Soul. Such a catastrophe may often happen long years before one’s physical death: ‘We elbow soulless men and women at every step in life.’ And, when death arrives . . . there is no more a Soul (the reincarnating Spiritual Ego) to liberate, . . . for it has fled years before.”
Result: Bereft of its guiding principles, but strengthened by the material elements, Kâma-Manas, from being a “derived light,” now becomes an independent Entity. After suffering itself to sink lower and lower on the animal plane, when the hour strikes for its earthly body to die, one of two things happens: either Kâma-Manas is immediately reborn in Myalba (the state of Avichi on earth),* or, if it become too strong in evil––“immortal in Satan” is the Occult expression––it is sometimes allowed, for Karmic purposes, to remain in an active state of Avichi in the terrestrial Aura. Then through despair and loss of all hope it becomes like the mythical “devil” in its endless wickedness; it continues in its elements, imbued through and through with the essence of matter; for evil is coëval with matter rent asunder from spirit. And when its higher Ego has once more reincarnated, evolving a new reflection, or Kâma-Manas, the doomed Lower Ego, like a Frankenstein’s monster, will ever feel attracted to its “Father,” who repudiates his Son, and will become a regular “Dweller” on the “threshold” of terrestrial life. Though an Occult Doctrine, I gave the outlines in The Theosophist of October, 1881, and November, 1882, but would not go into details, and therefore got very much embarrassed when called upon

––––––––––
* The Earth, or earth-life rather, is the only Avichi (Hell) that exists for the men of our humanity on this globe. Avichi is a state, not a locality––a counterpart of Devachan. Such a state follows the “Soul” wherever it goes, whether into Kâma-Loka, as a semi-conscious “spook” or into a human body, when reborn to suffer Avichi. Our philosophy recognizes no other Hell.
––––––––––

 

Page 638
to explain. Yet I had written there plainly enough about “useless drones”––those who refuse to become co-workers with nature and who perish by millions during the Manvantaric life-cycle; those (as in the case in hand) who prefer to be ever suffering in Avichi under Karmic Law than to give up their lives “in evil,” and finally, those who are co-workers with Nature for destruction. There are thoroughly wicked and depraved men, but yet as highly intellectual and acutely spiritual for evil, as those who are spiritual for good. “The (lower) Egos of these may escape the law of final destruction or annihilation for ages to come.”*
Thus we find two kinds of soulless beings on earth: those who have lost their higher Ego in the present incarnation, and those who are born soulless, having been severed from their Spiritual Soul in the preceding birth. The former are candidates for Avichi; the latter are “Mr. Hydes,” whether in or out of their human bodies, whether incarnated or hanging about as invisible but potent ghouls. In such men, cunning develops to an enormous degree, and no one except those who are familiar with the doctrine would suspect them of being soulless, for neither Religion nor Science has the least suspicion that such facts actually exist in Nature.
While yet in the body which has lost its higher “Soul” through its vices, there is still hope for such a person. He may be still redeemed and made to turn on his material nature; in which case either an intense feeling of repentence, or one single earnest appeal to the Ego that has fled, or best of all, an active effort to mend one’s ways, may bring the Higher Ego back again. The thread or connection is not altogether broken, though the Ego is now beyond forcible reach, for “Antaskarana is destroyed,” and the personal Entity has one foot already in Myalba;† but it is not yet beyond hearing a strong spiritual appeal. There is another statement made in Isis Unveiled (loc. cit.) on this subject. It is said that this terrible death may be sometimes avoided “by the knowledge of the mysterious NAME, the ‘WORD.’ “‡ What this “WORD” (which is not a “Word” but a Sound) is, you all know. Its potency lies in the rhythm or the accent. This means simply

––––––––––
* [Reference to Volumes III and IV of The Theosophist, October, 1881 and November, 1882, respectively, wherein H. P. B. appended some Notes and Footnotes to Éliphas Lévi’s essays on “Death” and “Satan.” Consult H. P. B’s Collected Writings, Vol. III, pp. 287 et seq., wherein additional remarks precipitated by Master K. H. are also included.]
† See The Voice of the Silence, p. 97 (Note 35 to Part III).
‡ Read the last footnote on page 368, Vol. II of Isis Unveiled, and you will see that even profane Egyptologists and men who, like Bunsen, were ignorant of Initiation, were struck by their own discoveries when they found the “Word” mentioned in old papyri.
––––––––––

 

Page 639
that even a bad person may, by a study of the Sacred Science, be redeemed and stopped on the path of destruction. But unless he is in thorough union with his Higher Ego, he may repeat it, parrot-like, ten thousand times a day, and the “Word” will not help him. On the contrary, if not entirely at one with his higher Triad it may produce quite the reverse of a benificent effect, the “Brothers of the Shadow” using it very often for malicious objects; in which case it awakens and stirs up only the evil, material elements of nature. But if one’s nature is good, and sincerely strives towards the HIGHER SELF, which is that “Aum,” through one’s Higher Ego, which is its third letter (Buddhi being the second), there is no attack of the Dragon Apophis which it will not repel. From those to whom much is given much is expected. He who knocks at the door of the Sanctuary in full knowledge of its sacredness, and after obtaining admission, runs away from the threshold, or turns and says, “Oh, there’s nothing in it!” and thus loses his chance of learning the whole truth––can but await his Karma.
Such are then the esoteric explanations of that which has perplexed so many who have found what they thought contradictions in various Theosophical writings, including “Fragments of Occult Truth,” in Vols. III and IV of The Theosophist, etc. Before finally dismissing the subject I must add a caution, which pray keep well in mind. It will be most natural for you who are Esotericists to hope that none of you belongs so far to the soulless portion of mankind, and that you can feel quite easy about Avichi, even as the good citizen is about the penal laws. Though not, perhaps, exactly on the Path as yet, you are skirting its border, and most of you in the right direction. Between our venal faults––inevitable under our social environment––and the blasting wickedness described in the Editor’s note on Éliphas Lévi’s “Satan,”* there is an abyss. If not become “immortal in good by identification with (our) God,” or AUM, Âtma-Buddhi-Manas, we have surely not made ourselves “immortal in evil” by coalescing with Satan, the Lower Self. You forget however, that everything must have a beginning, and that the first step on a slippery mountain slope is the necessary antecedent to one’s falling precipitately to the bottom and to death. Be it far from me the suspicion that any of the esoteric students have reached to any considerable point down the plane of spiritual descent. All the same I warn you to avoid taking the first step. You may not reach the bottom in this life or the next, but you may now generate causes which will insure your spiritual destruction in your third, fourth, fifth, or some subsequent birth. In the great Indian epic you may read
––––––––––
* See The Theosophist, Vol. III, October, 1881, pp. 12-15, [Cf. Collected Writings, Vol. III, pp. 287-91.]
––––––––––

 

Page 640
how a mother, whose whole family of warrior sons were slaughtered in battle, complained to Krishna that though she had the spiritual vision to enable her to look back fifty incarnations, yet she could see no sin of hers that could have begotten so dreadful a Karma; and Krishna answered her: “If thou couldst look back to thy fifty-first anterior birth, as I can, thou would see thyself killing in wanton cruelty the same number of ants as that of the sons thou hast now lost.” This of course, is only a poetical exaggeration; yet it is a striking image to show how great results come from apparently trifling causes.
Good and evil are relative, and are intensified or lessened according to the conditions by which man is surrounded. One who belongs to that which we call the “useless portion of mankind,” that is, the lay majority, is in many cases irresponsible. Crimes committed in Avidyâ (ignorance) involve physical but not moral responsibilities or Karma. Take, for example, the case of idiots, children, savages, and other people who know no better. But the case of each of you, pledged to the HIGHER SELF, is quite another matter. You cannot invoke this Divine Witness with impunity, and once that you have put yourself under its tutelage, you have asked the Radiant Light to shine into and search through all the dark corners of your being; consciously you have invoked the Divine Justice of Karma to take note of your motives, to scrutinize your actions, and to enter up all in your account. The step is as irrevocable as that of the infant taking birth. Never again can you force yourselves back into the Matrix of Avidyâ and irresponsibility. Resignation and return of your pledges will not help you. Though you flee to the uttermost parts of the earth, and hide yourselves from the sight of man, or seek oblivion in the tumult of the social whirl, that LIGHT will find you out and lighten your every thought, word and deed. Were any of you so foolish as to suppose that it was to poor, miserable H.P.B. you were giving your pledge? All she can do is to send to each earnest one among you, a most sincerely fraternal sympathy and hope for a good outcome to your endeavours. Nevertheless, be not discouraged, but try, ever keep trying,* twenty failures are not irremediable if followed by as many undaunted struggles upward. Is it not so that mountains are climbed? And know further, that if Karma relentlessly records in the Esotericist’s account, bad deeds that in the ignorant would be overlooked, yet, equally true is it that each of his good deeds is, by reason of his association with the Higher Self, a hundredfold intensified as a potency for good.
Finally, keep ever in mind, the Consciousness that though you see no Master by your bedside, nor hear one audible whisper in the silence
––––––––––
* Read pages 40 and 63 in The Voice of the Silence.
––––––––––

 

Page 641
of the still night, yet the Holy Power is about you, the Holy Light is shining into your hour of Spiritual need and aspirations, and it will be no fault of the MASTERS, or of their humble mouthpiece and servant, if through perversity or moral feebleness some of you cut yourselves off from these higher Potencies, and step upon the declivity that leads to Avichi.
H.P.B....



 

Page 642
APPENDIX
NOTES ON INSTRUCTIONS I AND II

PAGE 516

Students in the West have little or no idea of the forces that lie latent in Sound, the Âkâśic vibrations that may be set up by those who understand how to pronounce certain words. The Om, or the “Om mani padme hûm” are in spiritual affinity with cosmic forces, but without a knowledge of the natural arrangement, or of the order in which the syllables stand, very little can be achieved. “Om” is, of course, Aum, that may be pronounced as two, three or seven syllables, setting up different vibrations.
Now, letters, as vocal sounds, cannot fail to correspond with musical notes, and therefore with numbers and colors; hence also with Forces and Tattvas. He who remembers that the universe is built up from the Tattvas, will readily understand something of the power that may be exercised by vocal sounds. Every letter in the alphabet, whether divided into three, four, or seven septenaries, or forty-nine letters, has its own color, or shade of color. He who has learned the colors of the alphabetical letters, and the corresponding numbers of the seven, and the forty-nine colors and shades on the scale of planes and forces, and knows their respective order in the seven planes, will easily master the art of bringing them into affinity or interplay. But here a difficulty arises. The Senzar and Sanskrit alphabets, and other occult tongues, besides other potencies, have a number, color and distinct syllable for every letter, and so had also the old Mosaic Hebrew. But how many of the E.S. know any of these tongues? When the time comes, therefore, it must suffice to teach the students the numbers and colors attached to the Latin letters only (N.B., as pronounced in Latin, not in Anglo-Saxon, Scotch, or Irish.) This, however, would be, at present, premature.
The color and number of not only the planets but also the zodiacal constellations corresponding to every letter of the alphabet, are necessary to make any special syllable, and even letter, operative.* Therefore if a student would make Buddhi operative, for instance, he would have to intone the first words of the Mantra on the note mi. But he would have still further to accentuate the mi, and produce mentally the yellow color corresponding to this sound and note, on every letter M
––––––––––
* See The Voice of the Silence, p. viii.
––––––––––

 

Page 643
in “Om mani padme hûm”; this, not because the note bears the same in the vernacular, Sanskrit, or even the Senzar, for it does not––but because the letter M follows the first letter, and is in this sacred formula also the seventh and the fourth. As Buddhi it is second; as Buddhi-Manas it is the second and third combined.
H.P.B. ...

––––––––––
