INSTRUCTION NO. III

The following “Preliminary Explanations” were written by H. P. B. at the time of a grave crisis, or rasher series of crises, through which the T.S. passed in 1889-90. Treachery within the E.S. itself and persistent and relentless attacks on the T.S. from without, especially in America, necessitated the striking of a fresh keynote and giving directions for the closing up of the ranks of the E.S. At the time of reprinting the Instructions in London in 1890-91, certain portions of these “Preliminary Explanations” dealing with the details of the matter were purposely omitted by those of H.P.B.’s pupils who were constituted the editors, these portions being deemed by them of too personal a character to remain. This was done when H.P.B. was too ill to supervise, without her sanction and, as she afterwards said, much against her wishes. The “Preliminary Explanations” are therefore now printed exactly as they originally stood, those portions previously omitted being now put between square brackets: [ ].

E.S.
PRELIMINARY EXPLANATIONS TO NO. III OF
THE INSTRUCTIONS.

[BROTHERS and SISTERS in THEOSOPHY:

Many of you who, having joined the E.S., expected to receive their papers every two months, at least, but received only those for Jan.-Feb. and March April, must have felt disappointed, perhaps displeased. For this I am sincerely sorry, but owing to the present state of things in America, treachery from the first, and still worse treachery recently, the betrayal by one who joined the E.S. with the determined object of getting possession of its supposed secrets, in order to upset the Theosophical Society, and, by crushing me, crush the E.S. out of existence, has put an unavoidable stop to the teachings.
You have read in my “Open Letter to all Theosophists” the true and sad history of an ex-brother, who, whether from personal or other motives, consented to undertake the mission of a Judas. Though having failed in finding out what he so diligently sought by coming to London, he has nevertheless since then done us the greatest harm by substituting falsehoods and slander for facts, and even succeeded in turning several honourable men away from us. (Since I began writing this, two more prominent members of Boston have been upset by the joint efforts of

 

Page 582
our enemies’ “league,” and dropped out of the fold, labouring under the most false suggested impressions.) How, then, could I continue under such circumstances? Yet I had begun preparing No. III of the papers, which would have been sent to you long ago had not a third obstacle arisen.
A full reorganization was necessary, and our Brother W. Q. Judge, together with a few of the American Council of the E.S., kindly undertook it. But now the poisonous shafts of our persevering enemies are turned against him; and it is, as I know, partly owing to the same slanderous and underhand work that several of you have refused to comply with the new Rules issued by him in my name.
Of the chief reason, however, for stopping the teachings, few, except those in my immediate surroundings, know, and you have to learn it now.]
Of the fact that no such large and ever-growing body as the E.S. has now become could remain without its traitors, secret and open, I was aware from the beginning. I knew what I had to expect from the first day. I knew that the task I had undertaken would lead to more obloquy and misrepresentations for me than ever; that it was sure to create a large amount of bad feeling among the members of the main (exoteric) body of the T.S., which would be finally vented, in particular, if not solely, upon myself. And all came to pass as I knew it would. But if it is, in a great measure, owing to this that the delivery of instructions was delayed, it was not, as said, the sole reason. There came a more serious impediment––to me the bitterest of all. I received two letters and a reproof from the Masters. These reached me in no such way as to allow the hope that it was less serious than had at first appeared. That which I received both times, was a letter in plain language, sent by post and mailed quite prosaically at the Sikkim frontier, one in March, the other in August. The last of these left me no ephemeral hope that I had misunderstood or even exaggerated the facts. In their first, our Masters were displeased, and in their last, which arrived just as the news of M. A. Lane’s treachery came from New York, that displeasure became still more apparent.
It was at the end of August, and I was told to keep No. III of the Papers back, until further developments, and then to make those portions of the contents of the Masters’ letter that related to the E.S. known to all its members of both continents, without even omitting to show them how mistaken and dangerous had been my policy in the E.S. from its beginning. I had been warned by the Council and my trusted friends, of the danger there was in admitting such a number of persons, scattered so widely over the world, who, it was added, knew me not, except on hearsay, and each of whom I had no other

 

Page 583
means, as they supposed, of studying than through their auras and photographs. I myself realized that danger, but had no means of averting it, since the “Book of the Discipline and Rules” states that: “No one shall be refused admission, or the chance of learning truth and thereby improving his life, only because some one, or even all his neighbors think ill of him.” Such is the rule. Therefore, the larger the number of applicants who take the pledge, the greater the possibility of helping the masses. A member of the T.S. may be utterly unfit for the higher sciences and never grasp the true teachings of occultism and esoteric philosophy; but yet, if he has the true spark and faith in the real presence of the HIGHER SELF in him, he will remain loyal to his pledge and will try to model his life in accordance with the rules of the E.S., and thereby become nobler and better in every case. Membership in the E.S., and “pledges” sent, accepted and signed, are no warrants for a high success, nor do these pledges aim at making of every student an adept or a magician. They are simply the seeds in which lurks the potentiality of every truth, the germ of that progress which will be the heirloom of only the seventh perfect Race. A handful of such seeds was entrusted to me by the keepers of these truths, and it is my duty to sow them there, where I perceive a possibility of growth. It is the parable of the Sower put once more into practice, and a fresh lesson to be derived from its new application. The seeds that fall into good ground will bring forth fruit an hundredfold, and thus repay in each case the waste of those seeds which will have fallen by the wayside, on stony hearts and among the thorns of human passions. It is the duty of the Sower to choose the best soil for the future crops. But he is held responsible only so far as that ability is directly connected with the failures, and that such are solely due to it; it is the Karma of the individuals who receive the seeds by asking for them, that will repay or punish those who fail in their duties to their HIGHER SELF. Nature is ever struggling even in its so-called inorganic and inanimate kingdoms towards progress and perfectibility by production; how much more the nature of conscious thinking man! Each of us, if his nature is not productive or deep enough per se, may borrow and derive material for soil from the seeds themselves which he receives; and every one has the means to avoid the scorching sun, and to force the seeds to strike root, or prevent the thorns choking them, with a very little effort indeed. Therefore, my mistake did not lie in that I accepted too readily applications to join the E.S.
Nor have I sinned even in accepting men and women of whom I have not felt quite sure, though the opportunity of discerning their inner natures was possible and given to me in almost every instance. I have not sinned, in this, I say, as some think, because the rules teach

 

Page 584
again that the grand ethics taught in the secret Âryâsanga schools are not for the benefit or perfection of saints, but verily of sinners who need moral and intellectual help.
In what particular, then, have I failed to do my duty? Simply in this, as I am shown: I have begun to give out Eastern teachings to those who were unacquainted with the Eastern discipline; to Westerners, who, had they been thoroughly versed in the laws of that discipline so unfamiliar to cultured Christian-born people, would have thought twice before joining the E.S. Being taught to rely on their Saviour and scapegoat instead of themselves, they have never stopped to think that their salvation and future incarnation depend entirely on themselves, and that every transgression against the Holy Ghost (their Higher Self) will indeed become unpardoned in their present life––or their next incarnation: for Karma is there to watch their actions, and even thoughts. In short, I have begun to instruct them in spelling before I had taught them the letters of the Occult alphabet. Instead of solemnly warning those who signed their pledge that, by breaking it and becoming guilty of that which they had sworn to avoid, they incurred thereby the most dangerous responsibilities, entailing sooner or later the most terrible consequences, and proving this to them by living examples from their own and other people’s lives, I left them to their own devices. Instead of such warning, I have given out to them the preliminary knowledge that leads to the most hidden secrets of nature and the old Wisdom-Religion––and which but very few can appreciate. I have, finally, neglecting to prepare them by first placing each and all on a twelve-month’s or so probation, given them an opportunity of going quite easily, and in most cases, unconsciously to themselves, astray. It is in consequence of this that there has been such a number of members caring for nothing but new instructions to amuse them, and several backsliders who have already done the greatest harm to the Theosophical Society, let alone the E.S. This is the result and consequence of my neglect to conform with and enforce the rules; and I now confess it, in all humility, to all my friends who will read this.
How true are these words in Master’s letter:
“Experience but too clearly proves that any departure from the time-honored rules for the government and instructions of the disciple to suit Western custom and prejudices, is a fatal policy.”
“Before the pupil can be taught, he must learn how to conduct himself as regards the world, his teacher, the sacred science, and his INNER SELF,” the letter adds, quoting the Eastern aphorism that:
“The ruffled water-surface reflects naught but broken images:” the Master meaning that so long as the learners have not mastered their world-passions and remain ignorant of the Truth, their unprepared

 

Page 585
minds will perceive everything in the light of their worldly, not of their truly spiritual, esoteric judgment.
“How can they be expected, then” it asks, “to see aught but the broken truths, that such judgment is sure to suggest and distort the more? Violation of ancient usages is sure to result in evil.”
How true are these words is shown in our own case. For what have the violations of that time-honored usage which prohibits to speak in public or before the ignorant masses of sacred things, of which we, the two Founders, have been guilty, brought upon the T.S. and individual aspirants, even before the E.S. had been established, but grief and scandal? In blind foolishness, without warrant and reflection, have we, Col. Olcott and I, chiefest of all, lifted some of the veils of Truth, given some flitting glimpses of the secret laws of Nature and of Being, to a blind, ignorant, sense-ruled public, and thus provoked the hatred, deepened the skepticism, and excited the malevolent activity of many opponents who, otherwise, would have left us alone. Ah, friends, it was a wise law and a prudent restriction that ancient rule that kept the sacred, but dangerous knowledge (dangerous, because it cuts both ways) confined to the few, and these few pledged by a vow, which, if broken, led them almost to perdition. And to this day it is these few who run the greater risk. Some of the Theosophists, yet quite recently almost adorers of the T.S., and especially of its Masters, have lost or are losing unconsciously to themselves their moral balance; some because of the venomous words spoken in their ears by traitors, while others are flinging aside to the four winds their good Karmic chances, and turning into bitter and unprincipled enemies. Of the rude public one should have expected this, but from friends, brothers, and associates!
Well, as it now appears, so far as the members of the E.S. are concerned, it is in a great measure, if not entirely, my fault; and it is a bitter draught that Karma compels me to drink out of her iron cup. Had I instead of showing such hopeful confidence and belief in the inviolability of people’s word of honor, and almost a blind faith that the sacredness of their pledge would prove the surest guarantee of the good faith of any pledged member; had I instead of that, gone on the old occult lines of the Eastern discipline, such things as have taken place could never have happened. But I never permitted myself to even dream that a double pledge of such sanctity as the one taken in the name of the HIGHER SELF could ever be broken, however little one may make even of his “most sacred word of honor.” Even in the few cases when a dark and ominous aura around the face of a photograph plainly warned me, I still tried to hope against all hope. I could not bring myself to believe any man or woman capable of such deliberate treachery. I rejected as an evil, sinful thought, the idea that conscious

 

Page 586
depravity could ever remain on the best of terms with a man, after the signing of such a sacred promise; and, I have learned now for the first time the possibility of what has been truthfully dubbed by some Theosophists “only a lip-pledge.” Had I strictly enforced the rules, I would have, no doubt, lost the two-thirds of our pledged members––those who had signed it as they would any circular letter––but then at least, those few who will remain true to their vows to the bitter end, would have more profited than they have now. Having omitted, however, the usual precautions of the probationary period, I have but myself to thank; and therefore, it is but just that I should also be myself the first to suffer for it at the hands of the inexorable Karmic law. For this, ironclad as I have been made by daily and almost hourly unjust attacks, I would have cared but very little; but that which I deplore the most––with a bitterness few of you will ever realize––is the fact that such a number of thoroughly earnest, good, and sincere men and women should be made to suffer for the guilt of the few. For, though but a fault of omission on my part, still that guilt, as I feel, is due to my neglect. Behold! my Karma appeared as a warning almost from the beginning of the E.S.
I had started well. Several of those whom I knew to be entirely unfitted to take the pledge have been refused from the first; but I proved unable to withstand their prayers when certain of them declared to me that it was their “last chance in life.” The “pledge fever” made short work of their promises. One broke her vows only four days after signing her pledge, becoming guilty of the blackest treachery and disloyalty to her HIGHER SELF. And when I could no longer keep in the E.S. either herself or her friend, the two convulsed the whole Society with their calumnies and falsehoods. Then it was that the old wondering query, “How is it that ‘poor H.P.B.,’ notwithstanding the Masters at her back, and her own insight, is so evidently unable to know her friends from her foes?” ran once more the round of theosophical circles, both here and in America.
Brothers, if you will judge from appearances, and from the worldly standpoint, you are right; but if you take the trouble of looking into the inner causes producing outward results, you will find that you are decidedly in the wrong. That you should no longer do me injustice, let me explain what I mean.
Take for an instant for granted (you, who still doubt at moments in your hearts), that I am doing the work of a real, living Master. And if I am, then surely I would not have been entrusted with such a mission unless I had pledged myself irrevocably to the laws of the Ethics, Sciences, and Philosophy THEY teach. Come whatever may, I have to abide by these laws and rules even in the face of condemnation

 

Page 587
to death. Now, if the law, in common legislature even, holds that no person should be condemned before his guilt is proven, or becomes manifest, how much more strict must this law be in our Occult Code? Have I the right––in special cases when I see that a person has in him the germs of, or even a decided proclivity toward, evil doing, deception, ingratitude, or revenge, that, in short, he is not a reliable man or woman; but that, on the other hand, he is earnest and sincere, for the time being, in his interest and sympathy for Theosophy and Occultism; have I the right, I ask, to deny him the chance of becoming a better man, merely out of fear that he may one day turn round? I will say more. Knowing, as I do, that no earthly forces combined can destroy the T.S. and its truths, even if they can and do, in each case, hurt more or less my outward and miserable personality, that shell that I am solemnly pledged to use as a buffer of the cause I serve, have I the right, think you, out of mere personal cowardice and in self-defence, to refuse anyone the chance of profiting by the truths I can teach him, and of thereby becoming better? That many are called, but few chosen, is something I knew from the beginning; that he who speaks the truth is turned out of nine cities, is an old saying; and that the man (and especially the woman) who preaches new truths, whether in religion or science, is stoned and made a martyr by those to whom they are unwelcome––all this is what I have bargained for, and no more. Let me give you an illustration out of real life. When the notorious Madame Coulomb came to me in Bombay, with her husband, to ask for bread and shelter, though I had met her in Cairo, and knew her to be a treacherous, wicked, and lying woman, nevertheless I gave her all she needed, because such was my duty. But when, in course of time, I saw she hated me, envied my position and influence, and slandered me to my friends while flattering me to my face, my human nature revolted. We were very poor then, poorer even in fact than we are now, both the Society and ourselves, and to keep two enemies at our expense seemed hard. Then I applied to my Guru and Master, who was then at three days’ distance from Bombay, and submitted to his decision whether it was right and theosophical to keep two such Serpents in the house; for she, at any rate, if not her husband, threatened the whole Society. Would you know the answer I received? These are the words verbatim, the reply beginning with an aphorism from the Book of Precepts:
“‘If thou findest a hungry Serpent creeping into thy house, seeking for food, and, out of fear it should bite thee, instead of offering it milk thou turnest it out to suffer and starve, thou turnest away from the Path of Compassion. Thus acteth the fainthearted and the selfish.’ You know,” went on the message, “that you are PERSONALLY threatened;

 

Page 588
you have still to learn that SO LONG AS THERE ARE THREE MEN WORTHY OF OUR LORD’S BLESSING IN THE THEOSOPHICAL SOCIETY––IT CAN NEVER BE DESTROYED. . . . Your two Karmas [her’s and mine] run in two opposite directions. Shall you, out of abject fear of that which may come, blend the two [Karmas] and become as she is? . . . They are homeless and hungry; shelter and feed them, then, if you would not become participant in her Karma.”

Since then I have acted more than ever on this principle of trying to help everyone irrespective of what I personally may have to suffer for it. It is not, therefore, the utter incapacity for right discrimination in me, but something quite different that compelled me to lay aside all thought of possible consequences in this case of selection of fit members of the E.S. No; I sinned on a different plane. Neglecting to profit by my personal experience, I allowed myself in this instance to be more prompted by an easily understood delicacy and regard for Western feeling than by my duty. In one word, I was loath to apply to Western students the rigorous rules and discipline of the Eastern school; afraid of seeing any demand on my part of strict submission to the rules, misinterpreted into a desire of claiming papal and despotic authority.* Read your pledges and the Preliminary Memoranda, and study them; and then, finding the amount of authority you have yourselves conferred on me by signing the pledge––say honestly which of you, if any, can come and complain, not only that I have ever abused, but even used that authority over any probationer? In one case only––that of a friend who could hardly misinterpret my action––I have insisted that he should leave for a certain time America. And to emphasize this the more, no sooner have I heard from several of those members in whom I have the greatest confidence that the pledge, as now worded, was open to a dead-letter construction, than I have immediately altered it, of which I now notify you. The 2nd and 3rd clauses now stand––

––––––––––
* [And just because I have ever avoided to exercise my legitimate authority in the E.S., and sinned thereby, I am now punished at the hands of an earnest and sincere member of the E.S. who has just resigned, and is now denouncing in print, over his signature, those whom he is pleased to call my “personal worshippers” for “hero worship,” and of calling out to the T.S. on my behalf, “Behold your god . . . bow and worship!!” This is supremely unjust, and I hope in no case whatever true. The protest originated in the sudden unwillingness of this member, whose fine and sensitive nature has been worked upon in that direction by our enemies, to submit to the rules worked out by the Council of the American E.S.––rules absolutely obligatory with the pledged members, and which have to be followed or I will have to give up the Esoteric instructions altogether. Now, I ask, if a member once signed his pledge without protest, why should he object to repeat it once more to his lodge, the members of which have to be pledged to each other for common and mutual security? Karmic work all round, I say. “Pledge fever’’ is raging.]
––––––––––

 

Page 589

 

(2) I pledge myself to support before the world, the Theosophical movement, and those of its leaders and members, in whom I place full confidence; and in particular to obey, without cavil or delay, the orders given through the Head of the Section in all that concerns my theosophical duties and esoteric work, so far as my pledge to my Higher Self and my conscience sanction.*

(3) I pledge myself never to listen, without protest, to any evil thing spoken falsely or yet unproven, against a brother Theosophist, and to abstain from condemning others.†

I have done this because I think it right to explain the true spirit of the pledge. But it is precisely that unwillingness in me to ever guide any one of you more than is strictly necessary that is now shown as having been productive of evil, and as that wherein my fault lies. As the same letter says, addressing me:

“You have spoken to them before their ear was trained to listen, and begun showing things, before the eye of the learner was prepared to see. And just for this reason, hearing but indistinctly and seeing each in his own way, more than one [member of the E.S.] has turned round and tried to rend you [me] for your pains.”

[And now I sincerely hope that you will––some of you, at least––learn a lesson from my weakness, and show your appreciation of this by not judging me too unkindly if I now change somewhat my policy. For I have to either do so, or to drop the Esoteric teachings altogether, for those at any rate, who will disagree with this arrangement. To avoid repeating the mistake, this is what I propose doing. Each Paper will be sent as it was hitherto, only it will appear as a Supplement to the Ethics and teachings which will impart the rules of Discipline and the laws of Discipleship, as in the case of all Probationers.] Those who accept the new arrangement will have to study the latter, or they cannot receive any more teachings from me. For, as saith the Book of Discipline in the Schools of Dzyan:

––––––––––
* As this qualification may possibly be abused, the decision shall rest with seven members of the E.S. as arbitrators, four of whom shall be chosen by the Probationer and three by the Head of the Section.
The above rule will be incorporated in the Preliminary Memorandum.
† The second and third clauses of the original Pledge ran as follows:
“2. I pledge myself to support, before the world, the Theosophical movement, its leaders and its members, and in particular to obey, without cavil or delay, the orders of the Head of the Esoteric Section in all that concerns my relation with the Theosophical movement.
“3. I pledge myself never to listen, without protest, to any evil thing spoken of a brother Theosophist, and to abstain from condemning others.”
––––––––––

 

Page 590
“Speak not the mysteries to the common vulgar, nor to the casual friend, or new disciple. With prudent eye to the possible consequences, keep locked within your breast the teachings received, until you find a listener who will understand your words and sympathize with your aspirations.”
This does not mean that you are at liberty to repeat what you have learned to anyone whom you believe to answer that description, but that you can exchange views with your co-disciples who are pledged as you are yourself.
I can do no better, I believe, than give at once some of the oral and written precepts from the same book above mentioned, and as pointed out by the Master.
“1. To the earnest Disciple his Teacher takes the place of Father and Mother. For, whereas they give him his body and its faculties, its life and casual form, the Teacher shows him how to develop the inner faculties to the acquisition of the Eternal Wisdom.
“2. To the Disciple each Fellow-Disciple becomes a Brother and Sister, a portion of himself.* For his interests and aspirations are theirs his progress helped or hindered by their intelligence, morality, and behavior through the intimacy brought about by their co-discipleship.
“3. A co-disciple cannot backslide or fall out of the line without affecting those who stand firm through the sympathetic tie between themselves and the psychical currents between them and their Teacher.
“4. Woe to the deserter, woe also to all who help to bring his soul to the point where desertion first presents itself before his mind’s eye as the lesser of two evils. Gold in the crucible is he who stands the melting heat of trial, and lets only the dross be burnt out of his heart; accursed by Karmic action will find himself he, who throws dross into the melting-pot of discipleship for the debasement of his fellow-pupil. As the members to the body, so are the disciples to each other, and to the Head and Heart which teach and nourish them with the life stream of Truth.
“5. As the limbs defend the head and heart of the body they belong to, so have the disciples to defend the head and the heart of the body they belong to [in this case Theosophy] from injury.”
Before I proceed, let me explain, for fear of being misunderstood again, that by “Teacher” I neither mean myself––as I am but the humble mouthpiece of the true Teacher––nor do I write the above in order to stimulate any one to defend or stand by my own personality, but verily to make it clear, once for all, that to defend the E.S. and Theosophy
––––––––––
* “So shalt thou be in full accord with all that lives, bear love to men as though they were thy brother-pupils, disciples of one Teacher, the sons of one sweet mother.” (Vide Fragment III in The Voice of the Silence, p. 49.)
––––––––––

 

Page 591
(the heart and the soul of the T.S., its visible body) is the duty of every good Theosophist, of the E.S. especially. So is it his “bounden duty” to protect from attack and defend every fellow-brother, if he knows him to be innocent, and try and help him morally, if he thinks he is guilty. Nor is verse 5 intended to convey the idea that aggressiveness is the best course to take, for it is not: passive resistance and a firm refusal to listen to any slanderous reports about one another, in the case of a member as well as of a stranger or an ex-Fellow, is all that would be necessary in some cases to defeat entirely conspiracy and malevolence.
And now hoping that no misunderstanding is any longer possible, I resume in this hope the Rules, quoting a few more remarks upon them from the said letter. They come as a comment on art. 5, and I quote them verbatim.
“. . . And if the limbs have to defend the head and heart of their body, then why not so, also, the Disciples their Teachers as representing the SCIENCE of Theosophy which contains and includes the ‘head’ of their privilege, the ‘heart’ of their spiritual growth? Saith the Scripture:
“He who wipeth not away the filth with which the parent’s body may have been defiled by an enemy, neither loves the parent nor honors himself. He who defendeth not the persecuted and the helpless, who giveth not of his food to the starving, nor draweth water from his well for the thirsty, hath been born too soon in human shape.
“Behold the truth before you: a clean life, an open mind, a pure heart, an eager intellect, an unveiled spiritual perception, a brotherliness for one’s co-disciple, a readiness to give and receive advice and instruction, a loyal sense of duty to the Teacher, a willing obedience to the behests of TRUTH, once we have placed our confidence in, and believe that Teacher to be in possession of it; a courageous endurance of personal injustice, a brave declaration of principles, a valiant defence of those who are unjustly attacked, and a constant eye to the ideal of human progression and perfection which the secret science (Gupta-Vidy) depicts––these are the golden stairs up the steps of which the learner may climb to the Temple of Divine Wisdom. Say this to those who have volunteered to be taught by you.”
These are the words of great Teachers, and I but do the bidding of one of these in repeating them to you. What is found in the letter, I, H.P.B., now say to you in the authentic words, which are: “THINK; and thinking, TRY: the goal is indeed worth all the possible effort.” Much of what the Book of Discipline contains you may find in the fragments just translated by me from The Book of the Golden Precepts, and published for the benefit of the “Few.” These rules are as old as the world. And it is these, as I now see, that I was expected to impress

 

Page 592
upon the minds of all those who applied to me for instruction. This duty I knew well, and yet omitted doing it. I will not excuse myself by saying that I forgot to do so, for this would not be the truth, but I say and confess that I skipped it, out of an idiotic regard to Western prejudices and habits of thought. I knew that a code of preliminary ethics such as is obligatory with, and enforced upon, Eastern disciples would grate upon, even offend, the feelings of many American and European probationers. Ever misunderstood, judged by appearances, vilified, slandered and persecuted, I feared to hurt the Society by forcing several, if not many, of our members to sever their connection with it, if they found that I made the rules too exacting. For the first time in my life, I acted like a coward in my own sight, and almost a traitor to my duties by such compromise with my conscience. Therefore, though the first punished, I do not complain, and only hope that no one else will suffer through my weakness.
It is of the second and last letter in relation to the E.S. that I speak. The first was to the effect that those who desired to receive Eastern teaching had to conform to Eastern rules, and that I had better suspend my instructions until I had notified them of that; reminding them also of Rule 3 of their Pledge, which, if I had not the courage to enforce I had better change, as it only caused the members to become untrue to their vows. This was repeated by me to the Council of the E.S., and it led to their sending that joint advice to the Esotericists, which was surreptitiously handed over to the R.P.J. [Religio-Philosophical Journal] office and published.
Behold, all of you, the work of never failing, prompt Karma! Had I not departed from the old Rules of the Book of Discipline, such a sad case would not have happened, for there would have been no need of such a document as framed by the Council. For the Rule says, to the Chela:
“If thou canst not fulfil thy pledge, refuse to take it, but once thou hast bound thyself to any promise, carry it out, even if thou hast to die for it.”
And to the Teacher:
“Thou shalt not remind the Disciple who shows himself whether willingly or inadvertently disloyal to the letter and spirit of any law––more than TWICE: at the third time thou shalt separate him from the Body,”––i.e., ask him to resign or expel him.
But as unfortunately in general, though very fortunately in this case, every handful of mud thrown at the T.S. reaches only myself, and that the members of the E.S. had no opportunity of defending any one but myself, I was loath to enforce this rule. I felt a great unwillingness to even pass a message in which I was personally concerned.

 

Page 593
But after the second letter I could no longer remain silent; it is the law and I have but to obey, taking now this opportunity to implore every pledged member of the E.S. who feels incapable of allowing himself to be subjected to such a discipline, to resign. Knowing, indeed, as I do, the free American and the free Briton, how can I come and tell either of them, for instance:
“The office of Teacher was always considered as a very solemn and responsible one among our Asiatic ancestors, and the pupil was always enjoined to obedience and loyalty. This is what you have to tell them, advising them to study Manu.” (From the letter.)
And how could I hope to make them understand that by Teacher it was the Master who was meant and not myself, when I knew that many, many of them while knowing of me, and luckily not having any reason to doubt my existence, still doubted that of the Mahtmas, with the exception of the very few? Such is my only excuse. Unable to transfuse my certain knowledge of the reality of the Masters as men, into the consciousness of the Theosophists and even of pledged members, for the last fourteen years, I have ever avoided pressing this truth upon them. Yet unwilling to play the part of the crow in peacock’s feathers, I had to assert the existence of Teachers who had taught me all I know.
And yet the rules of Discipleship being so very strict upon the subject of the personal and other relations between the Teachers and the pupils, I have no choice. A Guru was ever considered as the chela’s benefactor, because he imparted that which was more precious than worldly wealth or honors, that which money could not buy and which concerned the welfare of the pupil’s soul and future weal or woe. Yet the Guru is not the only one pointed out to the chela’s consideration, but also all those who help a disciple one way or the other to pursue and progress in his studies.
[Here, I have to say a few words with regard to these. And now again it is not myself who is concerned, but I speak of other “helpers.” In the worst case, I can always take care of myself personally, and really need no one’s defence, though I shall feel always thankful to those who have offered it. But I mean by “helpers” such as William Q. Judge; and I now call upon all those who will remain true to their pledges to do their duty by both, when the time comes, and especially by their American brother. Both are threatened and both are hated by certain persons as unjustly as I am by some unprincipled enemies who would still call themselves Theosophists.
Ingratitude is a crime in Occultism, and I shall illustrate the point by citing the case of W. Q. Judge. He is one of the three founders of the Theosophical Society, the only three who have remained as true as rock to the Cause. While others have all turned deserters or enemies,

 

Page 594
he has ever remained faithful to his original pledge. If one wants to know how the Masters would feel towards him, let him read what one of them writes about the fidelity of Colonel Olcott and their appreciation of it, in a letter published in The Occult World. Though strong pressure was used to displace him and his associates (Judge along with them) in favor of another––a newcomer––and all manner of boons were promised for the T.S., Mahtma “K.H.” flatly refused, saying that ingratitude had never been one of their vices. Now that which Colonel Olcott has accomplished in India and Asia, W. Q. Judge has done in America. He is the Recuscitator of Theosophy in the United States, and is working to the best of his means and ability, and at a great sacrifice, for the spread of the movement; and he is now being infamously attacked and schemed against for this by one who has never done a thing for the T.S., but is now trying to crush it out of existence.* From the first this enemy of the cause, though he has never believed in any Mahtmas, their powers, or even existence, has worked for an object; hence he boasted for over two years of his own marvellous powers and intercourse with our Masters. He it is who published the shameful forgery under the Master K.H.’s name in the Chicago Tribune; he who made all those who would, believe that he was in regular communication with the “Adepts.” And now, when his object––to rule despotically over the whole American Section––has been defeated; when the flat denial by one of the Masters (K.H.) of having written a single line to any one in England or America for the last five years has shown him a deceiver, and that neither Mr. Judge nor myself would help him to deceive the public, or join him in a conspiracy of still worse deception with regard to Theosophists, he now turns round, repudiates Masters and Mahtmas, and tries to substitute for them some bogus adepts in the Rocky Mountains, and thus ruin the Cause. Having vainly tried to crush me, and finding me unmalleable, he now fastens his poison fangs on Brother Judge. He has cunning, indomitable energy, never relaxing vindictiveness, and a great command of money. These are grave charges, and may appear “untheosophical” to many, as they would undoubtedly be were there only danger for some units in the Society. But it is the Society itself, our CAUSE, so dear and so sacred to many of us, which is threatened––nay, attacked; and to save it I for one would not hesitate one moment to be regarded as untheosophical twenty times over, by the whole

––––––––––
* [An excerpt from a letter of H.P.B.’s, regarding which we have no further information, was published in Vol. II of Letters That Have Helped Me (Radlett, Herts, 1905), pp. 110-11; in it H.P.B. says: ‘‘. . . Let them read Master’s letter in the preliminary. All that which I said about W.Q.J. was from HIS words in HIS letter to me . . . Do with this letter what you like . .”––Compiler.]
––––––––––

 

Page 595
world. For, understand well; unless we unite all our forces against this enemy, we cannot win the day, or even have one hour of full peace and security for, or in, the Society. He is wealthy and we are poor; he is unscrupulous, and we feel bound by our pledges and theosophical duty. He lies with an ease worthy of the admiration of the Sons of Loyola; and we Theosophists hold that, whosoever lies, even to conquer an enemy, or save himself from a condemnation, is not worthy to call himself one. He attacks us by every available means and foul play; we can only be on our defensive, and defeat him by truth and nothing but the truth. Yet that truth must not be withheld, if, owing to his unrelenting hatred and alliance with every enemy who has hitherto attacked us, openly or secretly (I speak on knowledge), we would not now have the very name of Theosophy and its Society become very soon a public household word of opprobrium.
