

1 “THE CLASSES OF SPIRITUAL beings which infill our solar system are twelve in number, often however referred to as ten, of which three are spoken of as residing in the silence, and seven as being manifested. As H.P.B. wrote in The Secret Doctrine (II, 77):

“Occultism divides the “Creators” into twelve classes; of which four have reached liberation to the end of the “Great Age,” the fifth is ready to reach it, but still remains active on the intellectual planes, while seven are still under direct Karmic law. These last act on the man-bearing globes of our chain.”

“The four highest of the twelve classes of monadic or spiritual entities are the highest classes of the gods. The fifth class are entities who stand on the threshold of divinity, and may be regarded as quasi-divine; these are the various grades of the higher buddhas, whether Buddhas of Compassion or even the highest Pratyeka Buddhas. They are lofty spirits, liberated dhyâni-chohans, above the lower seven grades of manifested beings. This fifth class composes, collectively, the link by which all the lower septenary manifested universe is held as a pendant from the divine realms. As the apex of any one hierarchy blends into the lowest plane of the one superior to it, there must be links between them, connecting agencies, hierarchies of beings serving as intermediaries. It is this fifth class of lofty beings which directly links us with the gods. Their place in nature is in fact the realm of the Silent Watcher.
“The remaining seven classes of monads or cosmic spirits––dhyâni-chohans of many grades and degrees––are commonly divided into two groups: the upper three, and the lower four. Those of the upper three of this septenary host of spiritual beings are spoken of as the dhyâni-buddhas and it is they who comprise the Hierarchy of Compassion. They are the intelligences impelling the builders, i.e., the dhyâni-chohans of the lower four, into action. It is the interacting of the energy-substances between these two lines which together comprise the totality of all evolutionary processes within our kosmos. These two lines should not be confused. The dhyâni-buddhas are the architects, the overseers

 

Page 644
who provide the model, lay down the plans, and their work is carried out by the inferior grades of dhyâni-chohans called the builders, who receive the creative impress from the beings of the luminous arc, and carry it out. The builders not only work in, but actually form, the outer or material kosmos, and are (in one sense) the lower principles of the dhyâni-buddhas who compose the inner kosmos. Now each of these two lines is septenary: there are seven classes of dhyâni-buddhas, and seven classes of the inferior grades of dhyâni-chohans . . .
“A full-blown dhyâni-chohan was aeons upon aeons ago, in other solar manvantaras, a life atom; and every one of the hosts of life-atoms that compose our entire constitution on all its planes and in all its principles is in its outer self a dhyâni-chohan-to-be and at its heart of hearts a fully developed dhyâni-chohan––although as yet unexpressed. So man is not only one essence, which is already a dhyâni-chohan, but is also a host, a vast and almost infinite multitude of unevolved dhyâni-chohans. Even his human soul is on its way to evolving forth dhyâni-chohanship . .
“The agnishwâttas* or solar Lhas are another aspect of this chohanic host. The agnishwâtta pitris belong to the higher triad of the manifested seven which work directly in and through man. And it is precisely because we are straitly allied with this solar hierarchy, in fact belong to it, that we have these links of psychological and intellectual and spiritual connection with the solar divinity, Father Sun . .
“The mânasaputras† are likewise dhyâni-chohans. There are seven classes of these mânasaputras, just as there are seven classes of agnishwattas. In fact, the agnishwâtta-energy and the mânasaputra-energy are two aspects of the same cosmic beings. The incarnation or entrance of these mânasaputras into the as yet mentally unawakened humanity, of the middle and later third root-race of this fourth globe during this present fourth round, took place in seven stages, according to the seven classes of the mânasaputras. It took ages before all the humanity of that period became self-conscious. The highest class of the mânasaputras

––––––––––
* Agnishwâtta is a Sanskrit compound: agni, fire and svad, to taste or to sweeten hence it means those who have tasted of or been tasted by fire––the fire of suffering and pain in material existence producing great fiber and strength of character i.e. spirituality. This word ‘taste’ likewise has the meaning of becoming one with. Thus to taste of fire is to become at one with it: the fire-part of one’s nature is the part in which the monadic essence is at the time manifesting itself around an egoic center. From the standpoint of occultism, the term agnishwâtta signifies an entity who has become through evolution one in essence with the aethery fire of Spirit. The agnishwâtta pitris are our solar ancestors as contrasted with the barhishads, our lunar ancestors.
† Mânasaputra is a compound: mânasa, mental, from the word manas, mind, and putra, child––offspring of the cosmic mahat or intelligence, which later has always been described as the fire of spiritual consciousness,
––––––––––

Page 645
incarnated first, so that the human vehicles in which they imbodied were not only the first to become self-conscious, but likewise were the greatest humans of that far distant period; and the least advanced mânasaputras were they who entered the lowest human vehicles, which were also the last in time to become self-conscious . . .

“Kumâra* is still another name for these gods or cosmic spirits, and constitutes a third aspect of the same host of beings. Each hierarchy, whether it be sun, planet, or man himself, is an aggregate of monads, all connected together by unbreakable bonds––not of matter or of thought, but of the essence of the universe. They are intrinsically one, just as every ray that springs from Father Sun is of the same fundamental stuff, and yet they are different as individuals. The monads are kumâras higher even than the agnishwâttas and mânasaputras. The agnishwâttas or mânasaputras are called kumâras because, as compared with us, they are beings of spiritual purity. Of these three terms, kumâras is the most general, and could likewise be applied to other hierarchies of beings which cannot technically be called mânasaputras or agnishwâttas.”†
2 “We should note that in this passage only four basic principles are mentioned: âtman, its auric envelope, buddhi, and manas––the last really being the higher manas; and three transitory aspects: prâna, linga-œarîra, and the lower manas or animal soul. Certain students have wondered about this, and also why the second principle is given as the auric envelope; and, again, why kâma does not enter into the picture.
“First, kâma is inherent in every one of those four basic principles and their three aspects, because, in the human constitution, it is representative of cosmic kâma––the universal and fundamental principle-attribute which is the intrinsic force or energy of the universe. For we should always remember that every one of the seven principles in man, whether a basic principle or an aspect, is itself septenary.
“These four principles are considered ‘basic’ because they are the highest and therefore the most powerful and enduring in the entire constitution of man. They survive the great drama which takes place at death leading to the dissolution of the lower quaternary, or what H.P.B. calls the three aspects plus the physical vehicle–these lower
––––––––––
* A Sanskrit word: ku, with difficulty, and mâra, mortal; the idea being that these spiritual beings are so lofty they pass through the worlds of matter. i.e., become mortal, only with difficulty. Cf. Occult Glossary, pp. 2-4.
† G. de Purucker, Fountain-Source of Occultism. Pasadena, Calif.: Theosophical University Press, 1974, pp. 477-82.
––––––––––

 

Page 646
three aspects being reunited only preceding and at the time of the next reincarnation. This applies with equal force and propriety to the constitution and ‘death’ of any cosmic entity, such as a planet or a galaxy.
“By placing the principles in parallel columns H.P.B. suggests that each of them has its particular corresponding aspect on earth during the lifetime of a complete septenary man. To illustrate: various prânas in man correspond with the âtman; for, when traced back to their ultimate origin, the prânas will be found to be emanations from the âtmic monad. In similar fashion, the linga-œarîra is coupled with the ‘auric envelope’ enclosing the âtman as its spiritual aura; and likewise the third aspect or lower manas, the animal soul, is in the imbodied man the reflection of his buddhi. We can carry the analogy one step farther by pointing out that, just as manas is the focal center of the egoic human individual, so it has its correspondence on earth in the sthûla-œarîra, which is the focus of the powers and faculties making the physical man an individual separate from others.
“Now all these principles and aspects, and indeed everything in the human constitution, are enclosed within the auric egg, which is at one and the same time the aggregated effluvia from all the different monads and, because of this, the conjoined representative expression of the forces and energies of the septenary imbodied human being. Yet, when death ensues, the lower part of the auric egg, because built largely of the effluxes from the aspects, dissipates in that part of the astral light which is called the kâma-loka of earth; although even here the more ethereal life-atoms or appurtenant forces and substances are drawn upwards into latency to become the tanhic* elementals in the higher parts of the auric egg enclosing the permanent basic principles mentioned by H.P.B. Hence, the auric egg, because continuously functioning and perennially enduring, in one sense is the most important of all the principles or parts of the human constitution. Outside of anything else, it is the field, or composite fields, of the different phases of human consciousness on all its septenary planes. Thus at each new incarnation the various ‘aspects’ are formed out of the substances and forces of the auric egg––even the physical body or sthûla-œarîra being of the linga-œarîra, itself a condensed emanation of the lower layers of the auric egg.
“Further, H.P.B. points out that the mâyâvi-rûpa, or body of thought and feeling projected by the adept at his will, is formed of the substances and energies of appropriate layers of the auric egg; and just
––––––––––
* Tanhâ, a Buddhist term signifying “thirst for life.”
––––––––––

 

Page 647
because all such projections of the auric substance are for temporary purposes, the mâyâvi-rûpa possesses its name, ‘illusion-body.’
“It is from the auric egg that the actual rûpa or shape which surrounds the devachanic entity is formed, so that we can properly speak of this part of the auric egg, vibrating with the relatively spiritual consciousness of the devachanî, as being the field for the play of its consciousness. These layers of the auric egg, which we may perhaps rather graphically call the ‘body’ of the devachanî, give to the devachanic ego the illusion that it is in a beautiful spiritual vehicle. The kâma-rûpa after death, whether before or after it becomes the spook, is likewise formed of the appropriate substances drawn from the lower layers of the auric egg.
“From the foregoing we see how very important is the role that the auric egg plays in the human constitution, for it not only is the field of all the different ranges of consciousness of the imbodied man, but it is likewise the ethereal and astral and even spiritual substance or auric envelope out of which are formed every one of the vehicles of the human entity including his linga-œarîra, his mâyâvi-rûpa, his devachanic auric shell, and his kâma-rûpa after death.
“There are two basic ways of viewing man: one, as being compounded of the seven cosmic elements, as H.P.B. at first presented it; and the other, as being a composite of interacting monads or centers of consciousness working in and through and by means of the instrumental aid of the seven cosmic elements which give to man his seven principles.
“What, then, is the distinction between the different monads in man and the seven principles, and what are their respective functions? This very question was at the bottom of the dispute between H.P.B. and Subba Row. Subba Row followed the teaching of the Brahmanic esoteric school in fastening attention on the monads, looking upon the universe as a vast aggregate of individualities; while H.P.B. for that time of the world’s history saw the need to give to the inquiring Western mind, then taking a materialistically scientific bent, some real explanation of what the composition of the universe is as an entity-what its ‘stuff’ is, and what man is as an integral part of it. Now the seven principles are the seven kinds of ‘stuff’ of the universe. The higher part of each kind is its consciousness side; the lower part of each is the body side through which its own consciousness expresses itself. Yet every mathematical point in boundless Space can really be looked upon as a monad, because the universe is imbodied consciousness collectively; and imbodied consciousness or monads individually. . .
“Now then, what are these seven (or ten) principles? That is the point which was so important to bring out in H.P.B.’s time. A background

 

Page 648
of divinity clothing itself in spirit, these bringing into birth the light of mind; and the light of mind, co-working with the other principles and elements thus far evolved, brought forth cosmic desire; and so on down until we reach the sthûla-œarîra. (This word, by the way, does not mean physical but rather substantial or concreted body on whatever plane, whether physical, spiritual or divine; sthûla simply means compacted, gross.) As the universe is built of radiations, light and energy, these radiations, manifesting in a graded scale, can from one point of view be considered as forces; but when they become enormously concreted, they become gross stuff, which the higher forms of radiation nevertheless continuously work through.
“Every mathematical point of space is a monad, a point of consciousness, because all Infinity is infinite consciousness. Therefore every point of Infinity must be a consciousness-center, a sevenfold monad, which has its âtman, buddhi, manas, right on down, because the universe is built of these seven stuffs reducible to one causal stuff––spirit, consciousness, âtman. I emphasize this point because we must not have our minds confused with the idea that the seven principles are one thing, and the monads are something else which work through the principles as disjunct from them. That is wrong.
“Every one of the seven principles or elements of a monad can represent one of the cosmic planes, and is itself sevenfold. For instance, there is an âtman of the kâma, a buddhi of the kâma, and so forth throughout the range of element-principles or stuffs. What differentiates one man from another, or a man from a beast? The differences do not lie in their respective seven principles, because these enter and form the compound constitution of all entities, but arise from the relative degree of evolution of the individual monads. The human monad is far more evolved than is that of an animal or of a plant, or than are the highly unified monads which, due to their relative stages of development distinguish granite from marble or sandstone.
“The seven principles which compose man––âtman, buddhi, manas, kâma, prâna, linga-œarîra, sthûla-œarîra––are identic with those which compose our solar cosmos, man’s seven principles interblending and interacting in more or less the same fashion as the cosmic principles do. For instance, just as the astral light of our earth is its fluidic astral double, so in man the linga-œarîra is the astral double of the human body; and just as the various cosmic prânas are the compound vitality of our globe, so is the compounded prâna of the human constitution the element of vitality in man.”*

––––––––––
* G. de Purucker, op. cit., pp. 441-45.
––––––––––

 

Page 649
3“The tanhic elementals may be otherwise described as the emotional and mental thought-deposits, as Patañjali did; and these remain after the second death––and before the ego’s entering the devachan-stamped upon the various kinds of life-atoms which had functioned on all the lower planes of man’s constitution. Some of these tanhic elementals or life atoms peregrinate, and finally are psychomagnetically attracted back to the reincarnating ego during its process of bringing forth a new astral form preceding rebirth. Others belong to the monadic substances of the auric egg, and consequently remain therein in a latent condition, to awaken only when the devachanî leaves the devachan. Then these dormant tanhic elementals, in combination with the other life-atoms which had been peregrinating, combine in building up the new astral form that H.P.B. speaks of; and it is largely these two classes of tanhic life-atoms or elementals which compose the skandhas* of the man in his coming incarnation. And these skandhas are the various groups of mental, emotional, psychovital and physical characteristics which, when all collected together, make the new personality through which the higher man or egoic individuality works. They slowly begin to recombine and fall into their appropriate functions and places during the gestation period, continuing such ‘fixation’ in the womb, and finally after birth maturing as the entity grows to adulthood.
“Now the formation of the astral man takes place within the auric egg of the ex-devachanî. From the moment when the ego leaves the devachanic condition, the astral form becomes steadily more complete or definite as the gestating entity approaches the entrance into the womb. The ray from the reincarnating ego enters first the aura and later the womb of the mother-to-be by means of the growing astral form, which takes its rise in and from the most appropriate life-center or life-atom latent in the auric egg of the incoming entity.
“The term astral form is descriptive not so much of an actual body (as we think of it in our physical world), as it is of an ethereal agglomerate of life-atoms in the auric egg which is at first but vaguely shadowed, yet gradually assumes more or less a definite human outline, and usually one of extremely small size. However, we should not concentrate our attention so much upon size and shape as upon forces and energies in the auric egg more or less aggregated into a focus of activity.
“The entity thus preceding rebirth is attracted to the family to which its karma draws or impels it; and if the appropriate physiological activities take place at the right moment, then conception occurs and the growth of the embryo proceeds.

––––––––––
* A Sankrit word meaning bundles or aggregates.
––––––––––

 

Page 650
“As the radiance or ray of the reincarnating ego reaches this plane, it gradually entangles itself in physical substance, and establishes thereby its link with the human reproductive cell. That link is made because of electromagnetic, or rather psychomagnetic, affinity between the reimbodying ray and the living germ cell. Every germ cell is a compact of inner forces and substances ranging from the divine to the physical, and therefore is the ‘precipitation’ onto our plane of a psychoethereal radiation. In other words, it is an imbodiment of a ray-point that, originating in the invisible worlds and contacting physical matter by affinity, thus arouses a molecular aggregate of living substance into becoming a reproductive cell.
“This molecular aggregate is the first or preliminary deposit or appearance on the physical plane of the action of the ray-point. We see that the germinal or reproductive cells are not ‘created’ by the parent’s body but appear in and work through it from the imbodying egoic force or entity ‘outside’––the parent being the host or transmitter. The vital germ cell, whether of man or of woman, is originally an integral part of the model-body, which is an electromagnetic body of astral substance belonging to the plane just above the physical; and around this astral form the physical body is built cell for cell, bone for bone, and feature for feature.
“When the life atom as the chosen ray-point is invigorated by the descending energies of the reincarnating ray, it enters by psycho-magnetic attraction into the father’s astral body, and is in due course deposited into his appropriate physical organ as an astral precipitate. It thus becomes physicalized as a germ cell. In the mother this process of astral precipitation is the same in general outline, the precipitation being from the identic ray in both cases: in fact, each parent contains in his or her appropriate organ life-atoms belonging to and used by the reincarnating ego in past lives.
“The female parent is the vehicle of what may be called the vegetative or passive side of the ray-point, and the male parent the vehicle for the positive or active side. The ray-point seems to split into two, later to reunite by the coalescence of the positive and negative sides after the fertilizing of the germinal cell. We are here dealing with subtle astral forces which obey their own laws and which are not hindered in their action by the heavy physical world in which our bodies live.
“To restate the above in somewhat different language: the more material part of the new astral form is drawn first into the woman’s aura and then into the womb wherein it produces the living ovum and finds its suitable milieu; coincidently the inner and more mânasic portion of the astral form, which is the more ethereal part of the tip of the ray from the reincarnating ego, flashes to the male parent and

 

Page 651
produces in its appropriate physiological seat the positive life-germ. The father sows the seed, the mother receives it, fosters it, and brings it forth.
“The human egos awaiting incarnation are exceedingly numerous, so that there may be scores of entities which could become children of any one couple, yet there is always one whose attraction is strongest to the mother-to-be at any specific physiological moment, and it is this astral form which becomes the child. Many are the cases where the astral form, thus ‘rayed’ in two directions, so to speak, finds its progress into physical birth stopped because the man and the woman are either celibate or prefer no children, or for some other reason.” In such cases, the astral form under karmic urge and natural law tries again. Should the first environment prove a failure, the reincarnating ego may find itself drawn to another couple because of karmic relationships in other lives.
“The reincarnating ego has in a sense very little choice in the matter, if by this we mean a deliberate selecting of one’s future family. Such a choice as we understand it is almost non-existent, because the reincarnating ego has but just left the devachan and is sunken into the relative unconsciousness of the gestation period preceding rebirth, and thus is in no condition to choose with self-conscious intent. It is karma, which throughout controls these things; and karma in the abstract is infallible in its action.
“Every human being is surrounded by his own emotional and passional as well as psychovital atmosphere, which is really a portion of the lower layers of his auric egg. Now this atmosphere is alive and, vibrating with varying intensities, has its own psycho-auric individuality or vibrational frequency. It becomes obvious therefore that the ray-point, which likewise possesses its own frequency, is drawn more or less on the line of magnetic attraction to the atmosphere of the parent or parents whose vibrational frequency is most sympathetic to its own and with whom its karmic affinities are strongest. To round out the picture, I might add that both hate and intense psychic dislike––each of which is a kind of inverted love––sometimes produce strong psycho-auric attractions, thus explaining the pathetic situation of parent and child who repel each other.
“When the astral form has definite union with the human ovum, it begins to grow as the foetus. The lower or grosser portions of the astral

––––––––––
* I might point out that once conception has taken place and the embryo begins its growth, any attempt whatsoever to stop its development or to destroy it is plain murder. In the teaching of the esoteric philosophy, it is considered as being only a little less bad than murder of an adult human––little less only because such destruction or abortion takes place before the self-consciousness of the victim has had a chance to come into flower.
––––––––––

 

Page 652
form become the linga-œarîra of the child, in combination with the two general classes of tanhic elementals; whereas its higher portions, the vehicles of the ‘ray’ from the reincarnating ego (as the embryo and later as the child grows), become the intermediate parts of the constitution of the man.
“We must always keep in mind the important part played by the auric egg of the reincarnating ego in all the various steps preceding rebirth. The astral form begins its first growth within the reimbodying auric egg, gestates within it and continues to be ‘fed’ by its essences throughout the prenatal processes, and in time brings about the stages of birth, infancy, childhood and adulthood; for, in fact, the auric egg is really the true manifested man considered as being the vital auric prânas flowing forth from the various foci of the reincarnating monad.
“When the ray-point of the reimbodying ego, itself a ray from the spiritual monad, reaches its own intermediate sphere, it descends no farther into matter. But its psychomagnetic ray, having stronger affinities for the material worlds, descends still farther, awakening into activity the life-atoms in each one of the planes between that of the reimbodying ego and the astral- physical matter of our earth.
“Just here we see that the ‘life’ or characteristic of each part of the composite human constitution remains on its own plane, but extrudes its excess of life from itself into the next lower one, until finally the physical plane is reached, wherein the tip of the ray, collecting unto itself life-atoms of this plane, builds or forms the physical germinal cell. It would be quite wrong to suppose that the reimbodying ego itself is in the germinal cell or on a plane only slightly less physical than ours. The process is an exact analogy of what occurs in the building of the globes of a planetary chain, where the passage of the excess of life takes place along and around the ranges of substance from cosmic plane to cosmic plane.”*

––––––––––
* G. de Purucker, op. cit., pp. 622-26.
