
Here is an example of the relations of color to vibration well worthy of the attention of Occultists. Not only Adepts and advanced Chelas, but also the lower order of psychics, such as clairvoyants and psychometrists, can perceive a psychic Aura of various colors around every individual, corresponding to the temperament of the person within it. In other words the mysterious records within the Auric Egg are not the heirloom of trained Adepts alone, but sometimes also of natural psychics. Every human passion, every thought and quality, is indicated in the Aura by corresponding colors and shades of color, and certain of these are sensed and felt rather than perceived. The best of such psychics, as shown by Galton, can also perceive colors produced by the vibrations of musical instruments, every note suggesting a different color. As a string vibrates and gives forth an audible note, so the nerves of the human body vibrate and thrill in correspondence with various emotions under the general impulse of the circulating vitality of Prâna, thus producing undulations in the psychic Aura of the person which results in chromatic effects.
The human nervous system as a whole, then, may be regarded as an Aeolian Harp, responding to the impact of the vital force (which is no abstraction, but a dynamic reality) and manifests the subtlest shades of the individual character in color phenomena. If these nerve vibrations are made intense enough and brought into vibratory relation with an astral element, the result is––sound. How, then, can anyone doubt the relation between the microcosmic and macrocosmic forces?
And now that I have shown that the Tântric works as explained by Râma Prasad, and other Yoga treatises of the same character which have appeared from time to time in Theosophical journals––for note well that those of true Râja-Yoga are never published––tend to Black Magic and are most dangerous to take for guides in self-training, I hope that the American Esotericists will be on their guard.
For, considering that no two authorities up to the present day agree as to the real location in the body of the Chakras and Padmas, and, seeing that the colors of the Tattvas as given are reversed, e.g.:
(a) Âkâúa is shown black or colorless, whereas, corresponding to Manas, it is indigo;

 

Page 622
(b) Vâyu is made blue, whereas, corresponding to the Lower Manas, it is green;
(c) Âpas is made white, whereas, it is violet, the color of the Astral Body, with a silver, moonlike white substratum; Tejas, red, being the only color given correctly––from such considerations, I say, it is easy to see that these disagreements are dangerous blinds.
Further, the practice of the Five Breaths results in deadly injury, both physiologically and psychically, as already shown. It is indeed that which it is called, Prânâyâma, or the “death of the breath,” for it results, for the practicer, in death––in moral death always, and in physical death very frequently.

––––––––––

EXOTERIC “BLINDS” AND “THE DEATH OF THE SOUL”

As a corollary to this and before going into still more abstruse teachings, I must redeem my promise already given to you in my last letter. I have to illustrate by tenets you already know, the awful doctrine of personal annihilation. Banish from your minds all that you have hitherto read and thought you understood, in such works as Esoteric Buddhism, of such hypotheses as the eighth sphere and the moon, and that man shares a common ancestor with the ape. Even the details occasionally given out by myself in The Theosophist and Lucifer were nothing like the whole truth, but only broad general ideas, hardly touched upon in their details. Certain passages, however, give out hints, especially my footnotes on articles translated from Éliphas Lévi’s “Letters on Magic.”*
Nevertheless, personal immortality is conditional, for there is such a thing as “soulless man,” a teaching barely mentioned, yet still spoken of in Isis Unveiled;† and there is an Avichi, rightly called Hell, though it has no connection with, or similitude to, the good Christian Hell, either geographically or psychically. The truth known to Occultists and Adepts in every age could not be given out to a promiscuous public; hence, though almost every mystery of occult philosophy lies half concealed in Isis and The Secret Doctrine, I had no right to amplify or correct Mr. Sinnett’s details. You may now compare these four volumes and especially Esoteric Buddhism with the diagrams and written explanations in the Instructions, and see for yourselves.
––––––––––
* See “Stray Thoughts on Death and Satan” [Notes and Footnotes by H. P. B.], The Theosophist, Vol. III, October, 1881, pp. 12-15 [Collected Writings, Vol. III pp. 287-91]; also “Fragments of Occult Truth,” The Theosophist, Vols. III and IV
† Volume II, pp. 368 et seq.
––––––––––

 

Page 623
I have, first of all, to draw your attention to Plate I. The numbering, as you have already been told, is exoteric, and you have to leave it out of your calculations and consideration. But examine well the Auric Egg, containing the picture of the Microcosm within the Macrocosm, Man within the Universe, and try to retain that which I have now to reveal in all its details.
You find here Paramâtman, the Spiritual Sun, outside of the human Auric Egg, as also outside the Macrocosmic or Brahmâ’s Egg. Why? Because, though every particle and atom are, so to speak, cemented with and soaked through by this Paramâtmic essence, yet it is wrong to call it a “human” or even a “universal” principle, for the term is very likely to give rise to naught but an erroneous idea of the philosophical and purely metaphysical concept; it is not a principle, but the cause of every principle, the latter term being applied by Occultists only to its shadow––the Universal Spirit that ensouls the boundless Kosmos whether within, or beyond, Space and Time.
The Plate shows, moreover, Buddhi, the yellow semi-disc, serving as a vehicle to that Paramâtmic shadow, to be universal, and so also is the human Âtman, the Sun or white sphere above Buddhi. Within the blue Auric Egg we find the orange macrocosmic pentacle of LIFE, Prâna, containing within itself the (red) pentagram which represents man. Have you noticed that while the universal pentacle has its point soaring upwards (the sign of White Magic), in the human red pentacle it is the lower points which are upward, forming the “Horns of Satan,” as the Christian Kabalists call it? This is the symbol of matter, that of personal man, and the recognized pentacle of the black magician. For the red pentacle does not stand only for Kâma, the fifth principle exoterically, but is made also to represent physical man, the animal of flesh with its desires and passions. So far, I have given you only one of its explanations, namely, that which refers to human and not to macrocosmic principles. The orange pentacle may be taken for both the universe and man; but for the present we shall consider the latter only.
Now, mark well, in order to understand that which follows, that the upper (indigo blue) Manas is connected with the lower (green) Manas by a thin line which binds the two together. This is the Antaskarana, that path or bridge of communication which serves as a link between the personal being whose physical brain is under the sway of the lower (animal) mind, and the reincarnating Individuality, the spiritual Ego, Manas-Manu, the “Divine Man.” This thinking Manu, therefore, is that which alone reincarnates. In truth and in nature, the two Minds (the spiritual and the physical or animal) are one, but separate at reincarnation. For, while that portion of the divine which goes to animate consciously the personality, separating itself, like a dense but

 

Page 624
pure shadow, from the divine Ego,* wedges itself into the brain and senses† of the uterine babe (at the completion of its seventh month), the Higher Manas does not unite itself with the child before the completion of the first seven years of its life. This detached essence, or rather the reflection or shadow of the Higher Manas, becomes, as the child grows, a distinct thinking principle in man, its chief agent being the physical brain. No wonder the materialists who perceive only this “rational soul,” or mind, will not disconnect it with the brain and matter. But occult philosophy has evolved [solved?], ages ago, the problem of mind, and discovered the duality of Manas. Look at the Plate; see the divine Ego tending with its point upwards towards Buddhi, and the human Ego gravitating downwards, immersed in matter and connected with its higher, subjective half only by that Antaskarana. You will remember the name, as it is the connecting link during life between the two minds––the higher consciousness of the Ego and the human intelligence of the lower mind.
To understand this abstruse metaphysical doctrine fully and correctly, one has to be thoroughly impressed with an idea, which I have in vain endeavored to impart to Theosophists at large, namely, the great axiomatic truth that the only eternal and living reality is that which the Hindus call Paramâtman and Parabrahman. This is the one ever-existing Root-Essence, immutable and unknowable to our physical senses, but manifest and clearly perceptible to our spiritual natures. Once imbued with that basic idea and the further conception that if it is omnipresent, universal and eternal, like abstract Space itself, we must have emanated from it and must, some day, return into it, and all the rest becomes easy.

––––––––––
* The essence of the divine Ego is “pure flame,” an entity to which nothing can be added and from which nothing can be taken, it cannot, therefore be diminished even by countless numbers of lower minds, detached from it like flames from a Flame. This is in answer to an objection by an Esotericist who asked whence was that inexhaustible essence of one and the same Individuality which was called upon to furnish a human intellect for every new personality in which it incarnated.
† The brain, or thinking machinery, is not only in the head and skull, but, as every physiologist who is not quite a materialist, will tell you, every organ in man, heart, liver, lungs, etc., down to every nerve and muscle, has, so to speak, its own distinct brain, or thinking apparatus. As our brain has naught to do in the guidance of the collective and individual work of every organ in us, what is that which guides each so unerringly in its incessant functions, that makes these struggle and that too with disease, throw it off and act, each of them even to the smallest not in a clock-work manner, as alleged by some materialists (for, at the slightest disturbance or breakage the clock stops), but as an entity endowed with instinct? To say that it is Nature is to say nothing, if not a fallacy; for Nature, after all, is but a name for these very same functions, the sum of the qualities and attributes, physical, mental, etc., in the universe and man, the total of agencies and forces guided by intelligent laws.
––––––––––

 

Page 625
If so, then it stands to reason that life and death, good and evil, past and future, are all empty words, or, at best, figures of speech. If the objective universe itself is but a passing illusion on account of its beginning and finitude, then both life and death must also be aspects and illusions. They are changes of state, in fact, and no more. Real life is in the spiritual consciousness of that life, in a conscious existence in Spirit, not Matter; and real death is the limited perception of life, the impossibility of sensing conscious or even individual existence outside of form, or, at least, of some form of matter. Those who sincerely reject the possibility of conscious life divorced from substance, and a brain––are dead units. The words of Paul, an Initiate, become comprehensible. “Ye are dead and your life is hid with Christ in God,” which is to say: Ye are personally dead matter, unconscious of its own spiritual essence, and your real life is hid with your divine Ego (Christos) in, or merged with, God (Âtman); now it has departed from you, soulless people.* Speaking on esoteric lines, every irrevocably materialistic person is a dead MAN, a living automaton, in spite of his being endowed with great brain power. Listen to what Âryâsanga says, stating the same fact:

“That which is neither Spirit nor Matter, neither Light nor Darkness, but is verily the container and root of these, that thou art. The Root projects at every Dawn its shadow on ITSELF, and that shadow thou callest Light and Life, O poor dead Form. (This) Life-Light streameth downward through the stair of the seven worlds, the stair, of which each step becomes denser and darker. It is of this seven-times-seven scale that thou art the faithful climber and mirror, O little man! Thou art this, but thou knowest it not.”

This is the first lesson to learn. The second is to study well and know the principles of both the Kosmos and ourselves, dividing the group into the permanent and impermanent, the higher and immortal, and the lower and mortal; for thus only can we master and guide the lower cosmic and personal, then the higher cosmic and impersonal.
Once we can do that, we have secured our immortality. But some may say: “How few are those who can do so! All such are great Adepts, and none can reach such Adeptship in one short life.” Agreed; but there is an alternative. “If Sun thou canst not be, then be the humble Planet,” says the Book of the Golden Precepts. And if even that is beyond our reach, then let us at least endeavor to keep within the ray of some lesser star, so that its silvery light may penetrate the murky darkness, through which the stony path of life trends onward; for without this divine radiance one risks losing more than he imagines.
With regard, then, to “soulless” men and the “second death” of the “Soul,” mentioned in Isis Unveiled,† you will there find that I have

––––––––––
* Colossians, iii. 3.
† Vol. II, pp. 367-70.
––––––––––

 

Page 626
spoken of such soulless people, and even of Avichi, though I leave the latter unnamed. Read from the last paragraph on page 367 to the end of the first paragraph on page 370, and then collate what is there said with what I have now to say.
The higher triad, Âtma-Buddhi-Manas, may be recognized from the first lines of the quotation from the Egyptian papyrus. In the Ritual (now the Book of the Dead), the purified Soul (the dual Manas) appears as “the victim of the dark influence of the Dragon Apophis” (the physical personality of Kâma-Rûpic man, with his passions). If it has attained the final knowledge of the heavenly and the infernal mysteries, the Gnôsis––the divine and terrestrial mysteries of White and Black Magic––then the defunct personality “will triumph over its enemy”––death. This alludes to the case of a complete reunion, at the end of earth life, of the Ego with its lower Manas, full of “the ‘harvest’ of life.” But if “Apophis” conquers the “Soul,” then it “cannot escape its second death.”
These few lines from a papyrus, many thousands of years old, contain a whole revelation, known, in those days, only to the Hierophants and the Initiates. The “harvest of life” consists of the finest spiritual ideations, of the memory of the noblest and most unselfish deeds of the personality, and the constant presence during its bliss after death of all those it loved with divine, spiritual devotion.* Remember the teaching: The human soul (lower Manas) is the only and direct mediator between the personality and the divine Ego. That which goes to make up on this earth the personality (miscalled by us individuality) is the sum of all its mental, physical and spiritual characteristic traits, which, being impressed on the human soul, produces the man. Now, of all these characteristics it is the purified ideations alone which can be impressed on the higher immortal Ego. This is done by the “human soul” merging again, in its essence, into its parent source, commingling with its divine Ego during life, and reuniting itself entirely with it after the death of the physical man. Therefore unless Kâma-Manas transmits to Buddhi-Manas such personal ideations, and such consciousness of its “I” as can be assimilated by the divine EGO, nothing of that “I” or personality can survive in the Eternal. Only that which is worthy of the immortal God within us, and identical in its nature with the divine quintessence, can survive; for in this case it is its own, the divine Ego’s, “shadows” or emanations which ascend to it and are indrawn by it into itself again, to become once more part of its own Essence. No noble thought, no grand aspiration, desire, or divine immortal love, can come into the brain of the man of clay and settle there, except as

––––––––––
* See The Key to Theosophy, pp. 147 et seq.
––––––––––

 

Page 627
a direct emanation from the higher to, and through, the lower Ego; all the rest, intellectual as it may seem, proceeds from the “shadow,” the lower mind, in its association and commingling with Kâma, and passes away and disappears forever. But the mental and spiritual ideations of the personal “I” return to it, as parts of the Ego’s essence, and can never fade out. Thus of the personality that was, only its spiritual experiences, the memory of all that is good and noble, with the consciousness of its “I,” blended with that of all the other personal “I’s” that preceded it––survive and become immortal. There is no distinct or separate immortality for the men of earth outside of the EGO which informed them. That Higher Ego is the sole Bearer of all its alter Egos on earth and their sole representative in the mental state called Devachan. As the last disembodied personality, however, has a right to its own special state of bliss, unalloyed and free from the memories of all others, it is the last life only which is fully realistically vivid. Devachan is often compared to the happiest day in a series of many thousands of other “days” in the life of a person. The intensity of its happiness makes the man forget entirely all others, his past becomes obliterated.
This is what we call the Devachanic State and the reward of the personality, and it is on this old teaching that the hazy Christian notion of “Paradise” was built, borrowed with many other things from the Egyptian Mysteries, wherein the doctrine was enacted. And this is the meaning of the passage quoted in Isis. The Soul has triumphed over Apophis, the Dragon of Flesh. Henceforth, the personality will live in eternity, in its highest and noblest elements, the memory of its past deeds, while the “characteristics” of the “Dragon” will be fading out in Kâma-Loka. If the question is asked, “How live in eternity, when Devachan lasts but from 1000 to 2000 years?” the answer is: “In the same way as the memory of each day which is worth remembering lives in the memory of each one of us.” For the sake of an example, the days passed in one personal life may be taken by us as an illustration of each personal life, and this or that person may stand for the divine Ego.
To obtain the key which will open the door of many a psychological mystery it is sufficient to understand and remember that which precedes and that which follows. Many a Spiritualist has felt terribly indignant on being told that personal immortality was conditional, and yet such is the philosophical and logical fact. Much has been said already on the subject, but no one to this day seems to have understood the doctrine. Moreover, it is not enough to know that such a fact is said to exist. An Occultist, or he who would become one, must know why it is so; for having learned and comprehended the raison d’être,

 

Page 628
it becomes easier to set others right in their erroneous speculations, and, most important of all, it affords you an opportunity, without saying too much, to teach other people to avoid a calamity which, sad to say, occurs in our age almost daily. This calamity will now be explained at length.

One must know little indeed of the Eastern modes of expression to fail to see in the passage quoted from the Book of the Dead, and the pages of Isis referred to: (a) an allegory for the uninitiated, containing our esoteric teaching; and (b) that the two terms, “second death” and “soul,” are, in one sense, blinds. “Soul” refers indifferently to Buddhi Manas and Kâma-Manas. As to the term “second death,” the qualification “second” applies to several deaths which have to be undergone by the “principles” during their incarnation, Occultists alone understanding fully the sense in which such a statement is made. For we have: (1) the death of the body; (2) the death of the Animal Soul in Kâma-Loka; (3) the death of the Astral (Linga-Śarîra), following that of the Body; (4) the metaphysical death of the Higher Ego, the immortal, every time it “falls into matter,” or incarnates in a new personality. The Animal Soul, or Lower Manas, that shadow of the divine Ego which separates from it to inform the personality (the details of which process will now be given), cannot by any possible means escape death in Kâma-Loka, at any rate that portion of this reflection which remains as a terrestrial residue and cannot be impressed on the Ego. Thus the chief and most important secret with regard to that “second death,” in the esoteric teaching, was and is to this day the terrible possibility of the death of the Soul, that is, its severance from the Ego on earth during a person’s lifetime. This is a real death (though with chances of resurrection), which shows no traces in a person and yet leaves him morally a living corpse. It is difficult to see why this teaching should have been preserved until now with such secrecy, when, by spreading it among people, at any rate among those who believe in reincarnation, so much good might be done. But so it was, and I had no right to question the wisdom of the prohibition, but have given it hitherto, as it was given to myself, under pledge not to reveal it to the world at large. But now I have permission to give it to all, revealing its tenets first to the Esotericists; and then when they have assimilated them thoroughly, it will be their duty to teach others this special tenet of the “second death,” and warn all the Theosophists of its dangers. The pledge of secrecy, therefore, will no longer extend over this one solitary article of the esoteric creed.

To make the teaching clearer, I shall seemingly have to go over old ground; in reality, however, it is given out with new light and new

 

Page 629
details. I have tried to hint at it in The Theosophist as I have done in Isis, but have failed to make myself understood. I will now explain it, point by point.

––––––––––

THE PHILOSOPHICAL RATIONALE OF THE TENET

(1) Imagine, for illustration’s sake, the one homogeneous, absolute and omnipresent Essence, above the upper step of the “stair of the seven planes of worlds,” ready to start on its evolutionary journey. As its correlating reflection gradually descends, it differentiates and transforms into subjective, and finally into objective matter. Let us call it at its north pole Absolute Light; at its south pole (which to us would be the fourth or middle step, or plane, counting either way) we know it esoterically as the One and Universal Life. Now mark the difference. Above, LIGHT; below, Life. The former is ever immutable; the latter manifests under the aspects of countless differentiations. According to the occult law, all potentialities included in the higher become differentiated reflections in the lower; and according to the same law, nothing which is differentiated can be blended with the homogeneous.
Nor can anything endure of that which lives and breathes and has its being in the seething waves of the world, or plane of differentiation. Thus, Buddhi and Manas being both primordial rays of the One Flame––the former the vehicle (upâdhi or vâhana), of the one eternal Essence, the latter the vehicle of Mahat or Divine Ideation (Mahâ-Buddhi in the Purânas), the Universal Intelligent Soul––neither of them, as such, can become extinct or be annihilated, either in essence or consciousness. But the physical personality, with its Linga-Śarîra, and the animal soul with its Kâma,* can and do become so. They are born in the realm of illusion, and must vanish like a fleecy cloud from the blue and eternal sky.
He who has read The Secret Doctrine with any degree of attention, must know the origin of the human Egos, called generically Monads, and what they were before they were forced to incarnate in the human animal. The divine beings whom Karma led to act in the drama of Manvantaric life, are entities from higher and earlier worlds and planets, whose Karma had not been exhausted when their world went into Pralaya. Such is the teaching; but whether it is so or not, the Higher Egos are––as compared to such forms of transitory, terrestrial mud as ourselves––Divine Beings, Gods, immortal throughout the Mahâmanvantara, or the 311,040,000,000,000 years during which the

––––––––––
* Kâma-Rûpa, the vehicle of the Lower Manas, is said to dwell in the physical brain, in the five physical senses and in all the sense organs of the physical body.
––––––––––

 

Page 630
Age of Brahmâ lasts. And as the Divine Egos, in order to re-become the One Essence, or be indrawn again into the Universal AUM, have to purify themselves in the fire of suffering and individual experience, so also have the terrestrial Egos, the personalities, to do likewise, if they would partake of the immortality of the Higher Egos. This they can achieve by crushing in themselves all that benefits the lower personal nature of their “selves” and by aspiring to transfuse their thinking Kâmic principle into that of the Higher Ego. We (i.e., our personalities) become immortal by the mere fact of our thinking, moral nature, being grafted on our divine triune Monad (Âtma-Buddhi-Manas), the three in one and one in three (aspects). For the Monad manifested on earth by the incarnating Ego is that which is called the Tree of Life Eternal, that can only be approached by eating the fruit of Knowledge, the Knowledge of Good and Evil, or of GNÔSIS, Divine Wisdom.
In the exoteric teachings, this Ego is the fifth principle in man. But the student who has read and understood the first two Instructions, knows something more. He is aware that the seventh is not a human, but a universal principle in which Man participates; but so does equally every physical and subjective atom, and also every blade of grass and everything that lives or is in Space, whether it is sensible of it or not. He knows, moreover, that if man is more closely connected with it, and assimilates it with a hundredfold more power, it is simply because he is endowed with the highest consciousness on this earth; that man, in short, may become a Spirit, a Deva or a God in his next transformation, whereas neither a stone nor a vegetable, nor an animal can do so before they become men in their proper turn.
(2) Now what are the functions of Buddhi? On this plane it has none, unless it is united with Manas, the Conscious Ego. Buddhi stands to the divine Root-Essence in the same relation as Mûlaprakriti to Parabrahman, in the Vedânta School; or as Alaya, the Universal Soul, to the One Eternal Spirit, or that which is beyond Spirit. It is its human vehicle, one remove from that Absolute which can have no relation whatever to the finite and the conditioned.
(3) What again is Manas and its functions? In its purely metaphysical aspect, Manas, being again one remove (on the downward plane) from Buddhi, is still so immeasurably higher than the physical man, that it cannot enter into direct relation with the personality, except through its reflection, the lower mind. Manas is Spiritual Self-Consciousness, in itself, and Divine Consciousness when united with Buddhi, which is the true “producer” of that “production” (vikâra), or Self Consciousness, through Mahat. Buddhi-Manas, therefore, is entirely unfit to manifest during its periodical incarnations, except through the human mind, or lower Manas. Both are linked together and are inseparable,

 

Page 631
and can have as little to do with the lower Tanmâtras* (rudimentary atoms) as the homogeneous with the heterogeneous. It is, therefore, the task of the lower Manas, or thinking personality, if it would blend itself with its God, the divine Ego, to dissipate and paralyze the Tanmâtras, or properties of the material form. Therefore, Manas is shown double, as the Ego and Mind of Man. It is Kâma-Manas, or the lower Ego, which, deluded into a notion of independent existence, as the “producer” in its turn and the Sovereign of the five Tanmâtras, becomes Ego-ism, the selfish Self, in which case it has to be considered as Mahâbhûtic and finite, in the sense of its being connected with Ahamkâra, the personal “I-creating” faculty. Hence “Manas has to be regarded as eternal and non-eternal; eternal in its atomic nature (paramanu-rûpa), as eternal substance (dravya), finite (kârya-rûpa), when linked as a duad with Kâma (animal desire or human egoistic volition), a lower production, in short.” In this I do but repeat what I wrote in August, 1883, in answer to a critic in The Theosophist, in an article called “The Real and the Unreal.”† While, therefore, the INDIVIDUAL EGO, owing to its essence and nature, is immortal throughout eternity, with a form (rûpa) which prevails during the whole lifecycle of the Fourth Round, its Sosie, or resemblance, the personal Ego, has to win its immortality.
(4) Antaskarana is the name of that imaginary bridge, the path which lies between the divine and the human Egos, for they are Egos, during human life, to re-become one Ego in Devachan or Nirvâna. This may seem difficult to understand, but in reality, with the help of a familiar though fanciful illustration, it becomes quite simple. Let us figure to ourselves a bright lamp in the middle of a room, casting its light upon the solid plaster wall. Let the lamp represent the divine Ego, and the light thrown on the wall the lower Manas, and let the wall stand for the body. The atmosphere which transmits the ray from the lamp to the wall, will then in our simile represent the Antaskarana. We must further suppose that the light thus transmitted is endowed with reason and intelligence, and possesses, morever, the faculty of dissipating all the evil shadows which pass across the wall, and of attracting brightness to itself, receiving their indelible impressions. Now, it is in the power of the human Ego to chase away the shadows (sins) and multiply the brightness (good deeds) which make these impressions,

––––––––––
* Tanmâtra means subtile and rudimentary form, the gross type of the finer elements. The five Tanmâtras are really the characteristic properties or qualities of matter, as of all the elements; the real spirit of the word is “something” or “merely transcendental,” in the sense of properties or qualities.
† The Theosophist, Vol. IV, August, 1883: “The Real and the Unreal,” p. 268 footnote. [Cf. Collected Writings, Vol. V, p. 80 footnote.]
––––––––––

 

Page 632
and thus, through Antaskarana, ensure its own permanent connection, and its final reunion with the divine Ego. Remember that the latter cannot take place while there remains a single taint of the terrestrial, or of matter, in the purity of that light. On the other hand, the connection can never be ruptured, and final reunion prevented, so long as there remains one spiritual deed, or potentiality, to serve as a thread of union; but the moment this last spark is extinguished, and the last potentiality exhausted, then comes the severence. In an Eastern parable the divine Ego is likened to the Master who sends out his laborers to till the ground and to gather in the harvest, and who is content to keep the field so long as it can yield even the smallest return. But when the ground becomes actually sterile, not only is it abandoned, but the laborer also (the lower Manas) perishes.
On the other hand, however, still using our simile, when the light thrown on the wall, or the rational human Ego, reaches the point of actual spiritual exhaustion, the Antaskarana disappears, the light is no longer transmitted, and the lamp becomes non-existent to it. The light which has been absorbed gradually disappears and “soul-eclipse” occurs; the being lives on earth and then passes into Kâma-Loka as a mere surviving congeries of material qualities; it can never pass outwards towards Devachan, but is reborn immediately, a human animal and scourge. Let “Jack the Ripper” stand as a type.
This simile, however fantastic, will help one to seize the correct idea. Except through the blending of the moral nature with the divine Ego, there is no immortality for the personal Ego. It is only that which is akin to the most spiritual emanations of the personal human soul which survives. Having, during a lifetime, been imbued with the notion and feeling of the “I-am-I” of its personality, the human soul, the bearer of the very essence of the Karmic deeds of the physical man, becomes, after the death of the latter, part and parcel of the divine Flame (the Ego). It becomes immortal through the mere fact that it is now strongly grafted on the Monad, which is the “Tree of Life Eternal.”
And now we must speak of the tenet of the “second death.” What happens to the Kâmic human soul, always that of a debased and wicked man or of a soulless person? This mystery will now be explained.
