
The teachings and life of Franz Bardon
Franz Bardon has been called "the greatest and most important Hermetic adept of the 20th century." He has also been praised for the simplicity and accessibility of his writing, the practical nature of his teachings, and the revelation of occult 'secrets', one of which is the supposed meaning hidden in the first three tarot cards of the Major Arcana: namely, the 'Magician', the 'High Priestess' and 'The Empress.' We shall see how far these claims are justified during the course of this foreword and our review of his books.

Before we do so, we would like to use the example of the famous seer, Immanuel Swedenborg to illustrate why we believe Bardon is not a reliable guide or teacher. Swedenborg was a highly gifted clairvoyant and mystic, but not by any means a trained occultist or initiate. Thus he was unable to comprehend much of what he quite genuinely saw and consequently misinterpreted and confused a large part of his visions.

The fact that Bardon possessed certain psychic abilities and occult knowledge does not mean he fully understood the true Laws and Principles of occult science, nor their practical application. One can be a popular musician without being able to read music or possessing any knowledge of musical theory, but does that make one a musical expert who is equipped to instruct others? We should say it does not. Especially if, as in Bardon's case, many of his teachings are highly dangerous, as we shall see when we come to review his books.

Dangers of half-truths
In many of our articles we have made mention of the fact that half-truths are much more misleading and dangerous than outright falsehoods. Some of our readers may have wondered just what we meant by this and what a 'half-truth' is. Is it something that is only half true? Some occult fact, law or teaching that is incomplete? Yes it is, but it means more than these obvious definitions too. Let us explain. A half-truth is a statement that on the face of it appears both reasonable and true.

If, for example, we were to tell you that black is white or that two and two make five, you would quite rightly recognise these statements as completely false. If, on the other hand, we were to say, as Bardon does in his books, that the astral body is the 'soul' of man, this would be only half true, for it ignores the fact that the soul of man—by which we mean the Higher Self or mind—does not need a body to exist. It adopts one simply in order to gain experience of the material world which is impossible without a body of some sort, whether physical or astral. In short, Bardon, like so many other occultists, confuses the vehicle with the driver.

Let us take another example. Bardon tells his readers that there are only three worlds, planes or states of consciousness, namely, the physical plane, the astral plane and the mental plane. This too is a half-truth. For it ignores the septenary principle upon which the whole edifice of occult science rests; in this case the division of the manifested universe into seven planes, realms or states of consciousness, not three as Bardon teaches. Finally, Bardon tells us that creation arises from the union of the male and female energies, or the electric and magnetic fluids as he calls them.

This is true, for sex, as we explain in part eleven of Spiritus Hermeticum, is a universal principle throughout the manifested Universe; not an atom or an angel is devoid of it. But this is not the whole truth, for sex or gender is merely the product of other, higher principles, and cannot of itself, create anything, be it a stone or a man. That is the prerogative of Life itself which is the noumenon of the forces that proceed from it. It is this vital fact which Bardon omits to mention, either because he did not know the true laws of occult science, or chose to conceal them.

We have now seen that something may be true, false, or only half-true. And while Bardon makes comparatively few statements that could be considered to be completely untrue, he makes a great many that are only half-true. Not only does he mislead his readers in this way, he also advocates some very dangerous exercises. Exercises which can do irreparable damage to body, mind and spirit.

We will come back to these grave dangers when we discuss his individual books. But before we do so we would add that while it is perfectly possible to acquire considerable magical powers which the average person would consider to be miraculous through following Bardon's teachings, these of themselves cannot and do not make of man an Adept, unless we consider a black magician to be such, which we hope you will agree is not the kind of 'Adeptship' any sincere seeker after Truth would wish to attain!

Franz Bardon's teachings
In largely omitting and ignoring the spiritual dimension in his teachings and concentrating instead on the development of phenomenal, psychic abilities, Bardon is following the same dark path as countless generations of so-called 'magicians' before him. Men and women, who, although they may possess supernormal powers, are not one whit more spiritual than the average specimens of humanity, and often much less so.

Do not be misled by Bardon's frequent references to 'Divine Providence' (Göttliche Vorsehung in German), in his books, for this may mean anything or nothing, and in the sense that Bardon employs it, refers generally to his own distorted view of the occult sciences. Bardon mentions God a good deal in his books, especially in the first of them—Initiation into Hermetics—but in none of them does he provide the reader with the transcendental depictions of the Supreme we find in the books of J Michaud, PhD, such as The Golden Star.

Why is this? If you have not already guessed, we will tell you. Because Bardon's books are not concerned with the spiritual emancipation of man from the bonds of the flesh. They do not provide the keys to the great mysteries of Man and the Universe; of Life and Death. Neither do they provide any information or instruction on the ways in which the earnest seeker after Truth may serve his near and dear ones in particular and humanity in general.

For, as Jesus told his disciples:
"If any man desire to be first, the same shall be last of all, and servant of all" (Mark 9:35). This leads us to our principal objection to Bardon's books and the teachings he promulgates. They are almost entirely concerned with SELF, not others, except insofar as others can help or hinder the acquirement of magical abilities for oneself.

Nothing in any of Bardon's books ever soars above the mundane world of spirits and material, as opposed to spiritual power. The Great Light of the spiritual realms which has ever been the goal of all sincere seekers after Truth and Wisdom is entirely absent from them.

It is for these reasons that we have undertaken to write about Franz Bardon and his teachings. Unlike many other writers, both past and present, who do not disguise their fascination with the left-hand-path, Bardon pitches his teachings in a higher key, appealing to the nobler aspirations of man, and this makes his teachings all the more deceptive and dangerous. We know several seekers who have been taken in by his books. One of the authors of this website spent several years studying Bardon's methods and even had some success with them. But as he has told us many times all he ultimately learned was what not to do, think and be!

Fortunately for him, he did not experiment with the methods given in Bardon's third book—The Key to the True Qabbalah—for, as he explained to the writer, "an inner voice warned me that sound was the most potent of all occult forces which could as easily kill or cure, and I instinctively steered clear of trying out the exercises Bardon gives." He was wise not to do so, or perhaps he was warned by his own Soul—which ever watches over us—if we will only hearken unto it, which many do not.

We have known other occultists who followed Bardon's methods who were not so fortunate and felt that their entire lives had been permanently blighted by experimenting with the exercises in his books. Perhaps it is just as well, as the American publisher of these very misleading and dangerous exercises complains, that so very few readers ever manage to achieve any success with Bardon's methods.

This prompts the question of who he wrote them for, for we can count the number of those who possess even a modicum of the discipline, concentration, will and determination to pursue the practical occult sciences on the fingers of one hand. Most give up after a few desultory attempts fail to produce any objective results. Others are frightened off when they do experience some occult phenomena or other. And this applies to any system of magical training, not just that to be found in Bardon's books.

Perhaps, like many occultists before and since, Bardon was simply after his five minutes of fame? Or he may have genuinely believed that he was the chosen representative of his 'masters' whose task it was to provide a practical course of instruction in Magic for the benefit of all mankind. That at least, would be the more charitable view, but it would be disingenuous of us to say we share it for all the reasons we have put before you in this foreword. We have simply attempted to present the facts as we see them; it is entirely up to you to accept or reject them and so come to your own conclusions about the man, his motivation and teachings.

As an additional pointer to the misinformation and half-truths contained in Bardon's books we suggest you carefully consider the style of writing, the intent, and the language employed, and then compare them with The Golden Star (reviewed below), the Books of Hermes, or any of the great Sacred Texts of the world and draw your own conclusions. Although our suggestion is concerned with the English editions of his works we can assure you that same shortcomings are present in the original German books too. Herein you will find another mode of comparison which may convey fresh thoughts and conclusions to your mind.

In our article at left, we consider each of Bardon's occult books in turn, basing our review upon the English translations since these are the editions which most readers are familiar with. We give particular attention to the first of his books, whose English title is Initiation into Hermetics as this is by far the more popular and widely-read of them all. But before we end this foreword, it is appropriate that we say a few words about the author himself.

Franz Bardon's life
Very little is known of Franz Bardon's life and career that is not coloured by speculation and fantasy. As we have no wish to add to this fog of fancies, half-truths and misinformation we will content ourselves with the plain facts. Franz Bardon was a Czech stage magician and later occultist. He was born in December 1909, in Opava, in the Czech Republic and died at the comparatively young age of 49, in July 1958, in Brno.

Little is known of his early adulthood other than the fact that he trained as a sewing machine mechanic. What we do know is that he possessed innate psychic abilities from an early age and exploited these gifts before and after the Second World War when he made a name for himself in Germany as a charismatic stage magician and hypnotist. In later life he was frequently arrested by the Communist authorities in what was then Soviet occupied Czechoslovakia.

So far as we know, Bardon's three books on magic were all written and published during the 1950's. As we said earlier, Frabato—his supposed 'autobiography'—was published long after his death, so we have no way of knowing how accurate a biographical sketch it is or how much speculation and fantasy was contributed to the book by his friends, family and publisher. However, our personal view is that, like many biographies of occultists, it is a mixture of truth and fiction.

Some writers have made much of the fact that Bardon's arrest and imprisonment at the hands of the Nazis proves that he was a genuine Adept, if not an actual 'saint', whatever they may mean by that misused word. We would say that if the story of his imprisonment and torture are true (and we have not been able to verify these claims) it proves the exact opposite. For no genuine Adept has ever publicly acknowledged his status much less made a public display of his occult powers as Bardon did, being too well acquainted with the importance of absolute secrecy in these matters. Bardon would never have come to the attention of the Nazis had he remained hidden. The fact that he did not is an important point his admirers conveniently ignore.

After Bardon's death some of his followers claimed he was the reincarnation of a Tibetan Monk, while others were adamant the monk in question was Bardon's teacher in his present life. Whatever the truth of these conflicting assertions, a close scrutiny of Bardon's books, especially Initiation into Hermetics and Frabato reveals that he obtained most of his teachings from Tibetan Tantricism, and not from the Hermetic Wisdom of ancient Egypt as he himself claimed.

So much for the man, what of his books? We discuss all four of them in our main article at left, leaving you to draw your own conclusions as to whether, as his American publisher claims, Franz Bardon was "the greatest and most important Hermetic adept of the 20th century," or something quite different. . .
