3 
Meeting No. I: August 20, 1890 
Present: A.B., G.R.S.M., C.W., and C.F.W. 
Warning: 
H.P.B. explained the extreme seriousness of the Pledge taken by members of the  Inner Group. Occultism must be everything or nothing. This pledge once taken  resignation avails nothing; its breach means the most terrible consequences in the  present life and in future incarnations. It was a more serious pledge than the  voluntary initial pledge given by the Chela to the Master; for the Master might make allowances and forgive. But this was taken in the presence of all the manifestations, 
the emanations, that surround the Higher Self, and all these would be against the  breaker of the pledge. 
[Q.] C.W. asked if any had broken the pledge (E.S.). 
[A.] Yes, but H.P.B. would not say which. Some had kept it, some not; the breaches had been involuntary. This new pledge would colour all the life here and hereafter in all future bodies. Those who kept on the right way would be helped; they need not fear. If they were faithful, no external things could harm them. But each must be sure of himself before taking it, as there was no going back. The responsibility is terrible and cannot be evaded. Once taken, the pledge can never he recalled. 
Taking of the Pledge: 
The Pledge was then taken by each in turn. H.P.B.: “It is in the presence of the  Master you have taken it (after a pause), now I am your servant, and must answer  your questions.” 
H.P.B. then pointed out that we should not at first recognise the extreme  seriousness of (he instruction given, but little by little the importance would be seen  by us We must study, work hard, miss no point.
4  The awakening of Kundalinī: 
Night was bad for practical work, for we were tired, physically, mentally, and  morally. The morning was best, at sunrise, or at the uneven hours after sunrise. Never take even hours after sunrise: always the uneven, “the hours of the Gods”, (the  3rd, or 5th, hour after sunrise). 
The seven physical Nādis extend up the vertebral column from the lower lumbar vertebra to the atlas; then commence the super-physical, of which the fourth is the pituitary body. The three higher are between the pituitary and the pineal glands. When the fourth vibrates, it swings in curves of greater and greater length, till the pineal gland is set vibrating, the circle is completed, and Kundalinī is awakened. Ascend by the seven nādis to the foramen; if before this any physical effects are felt, stop; think  the stages in colour: 
Blue: Auric Egg (for Sthūla-Śarīra). May be taken 1 or 7. Violet: Linga-Śarīra. 
Orange: Prāna. 
Red: Kāma. 
Green: Kāma-Manas. 
Indigo: Higher Manas. 
Yellow: Buddhi. 
On entering the cranium the passage is from the physical to the psycho-spiritual  planes. Again seven stages, the colours being taken in the same order as far as the  fourth, but not to be thought of so much as physical colours, but as the essence of  colour, the pure bright hues seen in the sky. The shade of the colour depends upon  the predominance of the psychic or the spiritual. At the fourth, the pituitary body,  stop: the three higher colours of the super-physical septenary are not to be pictured;  only the pulsating of the interblended essence of colour should be thought. After the physical come the psychic, the spiritual, and the divine planes. It depends on the  intensity of the thought, the purity and sublimity of the aspiration, which plane is  reached. Only enter on the experiment after shutting out all worldly thoughts, worries  and troubles. 
The three vital airs: 
It is the pure Ākāśa that passes up Susumnā; its two aspects in Ida and Pingala.  These are the three vital airs, and are symbolised by the Brāhmanical thread. They

Meeting No I: August 20, 1890 5 
are ruled by the Will. Will and Desire are the higher and lower aspects of one and  the same thing. Hence the importance of the purity of the canals, for if they soil the  vital airs energised by the will, black magic results. This is the reason why all sexual  intercourse is forbidden in practical occultism. 
From Susumnā, Ida and Pingalā a circulation is set up, and from the central canal passes into the whole body. (Man is a tree; he has in him the macrocosm and Ihe microcosm. Hence the tree used as symbol; the Dhyāni-Chohanic body is thus  figured.) 
The Auric Egg is formed in curves, which may be conceived from the curves formed by sand on a vibrating metal disc. Each atom, as each body, has its Auric Egg, each centre forming its own. This Auric Egg, with the appropriate materials thrown into it, is a defence; no wild animal, however ferocious, will approach the Yogi thus  
guarded; it flings back from its surface all malign influences. 
No will power is manifested through the Auric Egg. 
Experiment: 
Get wool of the seven colours; wind round the annular finger of the left hand a  piece corresponding to the colour of the day, while meditating, and record the results.  This is to discover the ray to which the student belongs.
6 
Meeting No. II: September 10,1890 
Present: A.B., C.W., C.F.W., G.R.S.M., I.C.-O., A.K., and H.A.W.C. 
The three last took the Pledge. (In taking it H.P.B. told the Candidate to turn to  the Master's portrait). 
Auric Envelope: 
[Q. 1.] What is the connection between the circulation of the vital airs and the  power of the Yogi to make his Auric Envelope a defence against aggression? 
[A.] It is impossible to answer this question, which is the last word of magic. It  is connected with Kundalinī, that can as easily destroy as preserve. The ignorant tyro  might kill himself. 
[Q. 2.] Is the Auric Envelope of a child a differentiation of Ākāśa, into which  may be woven by the Adept the materials he needs for special purposes, e.g., the  Māyāvi-Rūpa? 
[A.] The question was somewhat obscurely worded. Evidently what the questioner wanted to know was, if the Auric Envelope was a differentiation of Ākāśa, into which, as the child becomes a man, if an adept, he might weave the materials needed for special  purposes, etc. 
But taking the question in the sense of an Adept putting something into, or acting on, the A.E. of a child; then this could not be done, as the A.E. is karmic and not even an Adept must interfere with such [a] karmic record. If the Adept were to put anything into the A.E. of another, which that person is not responsible for, or which does not come from the Higher Self (? Ego) of that personality, how could Karmic  justice be maintained? 
Adept: A.E.: Globe: Universe: Child’s A.E.: 
The Adept can draw from his own A.E., or even from that of the Globe, or of  the l Iniverse, according to his degree. This envelope is the receptacle of all Karmic

Meeting No. II: September 10,1890 7 
causes and photographs all things like a sensitive plate. 
The child has a very small A.E. which is in colour almost pure white. At birth  the A.E. consists of pure Ākāśa plus the Tanhās, which, until the seventh year remain  potential or in latency. 
A.E. the transmitter: 
The A.E. is the transmitter from the individual lives to the eternal, from the  periodical lives (Prāna) to the eternal life (Jīva). 
Idiot: 
The A.E. of an idiot cannot be said to be human, that is, it is not tinged with  manas. His aura would be of the same nature as that of the animals. 
Confession: 
The reason why the confession of the R[oman] C[atholic] and Greek Churches  is such a sin, is because the confessor interferes with the A.E. of a child or adult  penitent by means of his will power engrafting artificially emanations from his own A.E. and casting seeds for germination into the A.E. of his subject. It is simply on  the same lines as hypnotic suggestion. 
Suggestion: 
The above remarks applied equally to hypnotism, although the latter was a  physico-psychic force, and constituted one of its many serious dangers. At the same  lime a “good thing might pass through dirty channels”, as in the case of the breaking by suggestion of the alcohol or opium habit. Mesmerism might be used by the occultist to remove evil habits, if the intention were perfectly pure, as on the higher  plane, intention was everything; and good intentions must work for good. 
A.E. and Manas: 
[Q. 3.] Is the A E. the expansion of the “pillar of light”, the manasic principle,  and so not surrounding the child until its seventh year? 
[ A.] The A.E. is quite pure al birth It is a question which manas w i l l colour il

8  
at the seventh year. The mānasic expansion is pure Ākāśa. The ray of manas is let  down into the vortex of the lower principles, and being discoloured and so limited  by the Kāmic Tanhās and by the defects of the bodily organism forms the  personality. Hereditary Karma can reach the child before the seventh year, but no  individual Karma can come into play until the descent of the manas. 
The A.E. is to the man the  
same as the Astral Light is to the  
Earth, 
" " Ether " " " Astral Light, 
" " Ākāśa " " " Ether. 
The critical states are left out in this enumeration. These latter are the Laya Centres, or missing links in our consciousness, which separate those four planes from one  another. 
The Dweller: 
The “dweller on the threshold” is found in two cases: (a) in the case of the  separation of the Triangle from the Quaternary; or (b) when kāmic desires and  passions are so intense that Kāma-Rūpa persists in Kāma-Loka beyond the Devachanic period of the Ego, and thus surviving the reincarnation of the Devachanic Entity (e.g. in the case when reincarnation occurs in two or three hundred years) becomes this “dweller” by intensifying the kāmic principle of the new personality. Some become  mad from this cause. 
Intellect: 
The white Adept is not always at first of powerful intellect. In fact H.P.B. had  known Adepts whose intellectual powers were originally below the average, ft is the Adept's purity, his equal love to all, his working with nature, with karma, with his “inner god”, that give him this power. Intellect alone will make the black magician. For intellect alone is accompanied with pride and selfishness; it is the intellect plus the  spiritual that raises man. For spirituality prevents pride and vanity. 
Metaphysics: 
Metaphysics are the domain of the manas, pure: whereas physical science is that  of the material or Kāma-Manas, which is, as every principle, of seven degrees. The  mathematician, who (is) without spirituality, however great he may be, will not reach  metaphysics: but the metaphysician will master the highest conceptions of
Meeting No. II: September 10,1890 9 
mathematics and apply them without learning. To a bom metaphysician the psychic  plane will not be of much account: as he will see its errors - in as much as it is not  the thing he seeks for - immediately he enters on the psychic plane. 
Music: 
With respect to music and other arts, they are either the children of the Mānasic  or Kāma-Mānasic principle, proportionately as soul or technicality predominates. 
Karma: 
After each incarnation, when the mānasic ray returns to its father, the Ego, some  of its atoms remain behind and scatter. These mānasic atoms, tanhic and other  “causes”, being of the same nature as the manas, are attracted to it by strong bonds  of affinity, and on the reincarnation of the Ego are unerringly attracted to it and  constitute its karma. Until these are all gathered up, the individuality is not free from  rebirth. 
(cf. the following fragment of the gospel of Philip, as quoted by Epiphanius: “I  have known myself and gathered up myself from all quarters, and have sown to the  Archón no children, but have tom up his roots, and gathered together the scattered  members, and I know thee who thou art.” See Diet. Christ. Biog. N, 414.)' 
The Higher Manas is responsible for the ray it sends forth. If the ray be not  soiled no bad Karma is generated. 
Turiya State: 
(Yogis cannot attain this state unless the Δ is separated from the □). 
1 William Smith and Henry Wace, Dictionary of Christian Biography, 4 vols., Boston 1877-87, vol.  IV, p. 414, lemma: Pistis Sophia. 
The quotation from the Gospel of Philip can be found in The Panarion of St. Epiphanius. XXVI, xvii, 2; translated in I’ll. K. Amidon, The Panarion of St. Epiphanius, Bishop ofSalamis, New York and  Oxford, 1990, p. 81: “The Lord revealed to me what the soul should say when it goes up to heaven and  how it should answer each of the powers above. It should say I have recognized myself and have collected myself from everywhere, and I have not sown children for the archftn, hot I have uprooted its roots  and collected the dispersed members, and I know who you are For I am of those above."
10 The InnerGroupTeachings of H.P.Blavatsky Good and bad Karma: 
We should bear in mind that, in becoming Karmaless, both good as well as bad  karma have to be got rid of, and that Nidānas started the acquisition of good karma,  are as binding as those induced in the other direction. For both are karma. 
Mahat: 
Mahat is the manifested, universal Parabrahmic Mind (for one Mahā manvantara) on the third plane. It is the law whereby the Light falls from plane to  plane and differentiates. The Mānasaputras are its emanations. 
Man alone is capable of conceiving the universe on this plane of existence. Existence: 
Existence is; but when the entity does not feel it, for that entity it is not. The  pain of an operation exists, though the patient does not feel it; and for the patient  it is not. 
Upper colours: 
[Q. 4.] In practising concentration, we are told to stop at the Pituitary body,  terminating the series of colours with Red. It seems strange to crown the series with  the colour of Kāma. What is the explanation of this? 
[A.] We were told to stop at Red: that is, to stop before Red. The upper Red is  rather the golden-coloured Prāna. There are three degrees, Yellow, Yellow-orange  and red-orange. When the flood of Light appears, it must be steadied, otherwise true  vision is impossible. 
Metals: 
When the student has discovered his colour, the day of that colour should be  chosen as the day for special effort, and a ring of the metal of the day worn on the  4th finger of the left hand. When the dominant colour is found, it alone should be  used and the seven colours abandoned.
Meeting No. II: September 10, 1890 11 
[Q. 5.] What is the correct pronunciation of Aum? 
[A.] It should first be practised physically, always at the same pitch, which must  be discovered in the same way as the particular colour of the student is found, for  each has his or her own particular tone. 
The aura of any person might have a predominant colour. But unless the region  of the aura suffused with this colour corresponds with the back of the neck, it was  not their colour. 
Experiment: 
(Tuning forks - seven - should be used to get the pitch.) AUM consists of two  vowels and one semi-vowel, which latter must be prolonged. Just as nature has its  Fa, so each man has his, man being differentiated from Nature. The body may be  compared to an instrument and the Ego to a musician. First learn to play on the  Tattvas and Principles as one does on a piano. Learn first the notes, then the chords,  and then the melodies. Once the student is master of every chord, he may begin to  be a co-worker with nature and for others. He may then by the experience he has  gained of his own nature, and by his knowledge of the “chords”, strike such as will  be beneficial in another, and which will serve as a “key-note” for beneficial results. 
A (Try to have a clear representation of the geometrical Δ on every plane, the  conception gradually growing more metaphysical and ending with the subjective A Ātma-Buddhi-Manas. It is only by the knowledge of this Δ under all forms that  you can succeed, e.g., in enclosing the past and the future in the present. 
Remember that you have, so to speak, to enclose the □ in the Δ; in other words, 
you must so purify the lower quaternary, that it vibrates in unison with the upper  triad.)

12  Light of Kundalim: 
[Q. 6] As soon as the waves of Light commence should the mind be centred on  the eye or on the waves of Light? 
[A.] On the Light. 
[Q. 7] When one feels colour, is it the different rapidity of vibrations that  one sees? 
[A.] No; one sense merges into another: all senses are but differentiations of the  one sense-consciousness. Hence we can feel colours and see sounds. 
[Q. 8] In repeating Aum, should one lose oneself in the light around one, or  should one keep the mind fixed steadily on the Higher Self? 
[A.] On the Higher Self. 
Effect of the Pledge: 
The effect of the pledge on future incarnations, if it be kept, is that it will be  latent in the succeeding life and will, unconsciously to the disciple, guide him. 
Seven births: 
There must be seven actual incarnations, but the disciple might be so pure and  strong, that the incarnations might be of the shortest character, e.g., almost still born, living only an hour or two. 
Devachan: 
Advance may be made in occultism even in Devachan, if the mind and soul be  set thereon during life; but it is only as in a dream, and the knowledge will fade  away as the memory of a dream fades, unless it be kept alive by conscious study. 
Fear: 
Fear and hatred are one and the same thing essentially. He who fears nothing  will never hate, and he who hates nothing will never fear.
13 
Meeting No. III: September 17,1890 
Present: C.W., I.C.-O., A.B., C.F.W., G.R.S.M., A.K., H.A.W.C.,  
A.L.C., L.[M.]C. 
The last two took the Pledge. 
Image of Δ: 
[Q. 9] What is the meaning of the phrase “form a clear image of the Δ on every  plane”? e.g. on the astral plane what should one think of as the Δ? 
[A.] H.P.B. asked whether the question signified the meaning of the Δ, or the  way to represent the Δ on the “screen of light”? The questioner explaining that the  latter was the meaning, H.P.B. said that it was only in the Turīya state, the highest of the seven steps of Rāja-Yoga, that the Yogi can represent to himself that which is abstract. Below this state, the perceptive power, being conditioned, must have some form to contemplate; it cannot represent to itself the arūpa. In the Turīya state the Δ is in yourself, and is felt. Below the Turīya, there must be a symbol to represent Ātmā Buddhi-Manas. It is not a mere geometrical triangle, but the triad imaged, to make  thought possible. Of this triad we can make some kind of representation of Manas, however indistinct; Buddhi it is next to impossible to represent, while of Ātman no image could be formed. We must try to represent the  Δ to ourselves on higher and higher planes. 
(The Turīya is the 4th state.). 
The Augoeides: 
We must figure Manas as overshadowed by Buddhi and immersed in Ātman. Only Manas, the Higher Ego, can be represented; we may think it as the Augoeides, the  radiant figure in Zanoni2. A very good psychic might sec this. 
2 The novel of Edward George E. L. Bulwer-Lytton from 1842
14  Psychism: 
Psychic vision, however, is not to be desired, since psyche is earthly and evil.  More and more as science advances the psychic will be reached and understood;  psychism has in it nothing that is spiritual. Science is right on its own plane, from  its own standpoint. The law of the conservation of energy implies that psychic motion 
is generated by motion. Psychic action being only the motion on the astral plane, a material plane, the psychologist is right who sees in it nothing beyond matter. Animals have no spirit, but they have psychic vision and are sensitive to psychic conditions;  observe how these re-act on their health, their bodily state. 
Motion: 
Motion is the abstract deity; on the highest plane it is arūpa; but on the lowest  it is merely mechanical. Psychic action is within the sphere of psychic motion. Ere  psychic action can be developed in the brain and nerves, there must be adequate  action which generates it on the physical plane. The paralysed animal, that cannot  generate action in the physical body, cannot think. Psychics merely see on a plane  of different material density; the spiritual glimpses sometimes obtained by them come from a plane beyond. A psychic’s vision is that of one coming, as it were, into a 
lighted room, and seeing everything there by artificial light. When the light is extinguished, vision is lost. Spiritual vision sees by the light within, “the light hidden beneath the bushel” of the body, by which we can see clearly and independently of all outside. The psychic seeing by an external light, the vision is coloured by the nature  
of that light. 
Seven planes in Astral Light: 
C.W. saying that she felt as though she saw on three planes, H.P.B. answered  that each plane was sevenfold, the astral, as everywhere else. She gave as an example, on the physical plane, the vision of a table with the physical sight; seeing it still, with the eyes closed, by retinal impression; the image of it conserved in the brain; it can be recalled by memory; the sight of it in a dream; or as an aggregate of atoms; or disintegrated; all these are on the physical plane. Then we can begin  
again on the astral plane, and obtain another septenary. This hint should be followed  and worked out. 
The students might speak of this to other Esotericists, as there was nothing occult  in it. The important thing to be kept secret was the way in which such
Meeting No III: September 17, 1890 15 
loachings were put into practice, the correspondences. The danger of speaking of this truth publicly was that it would be likely to generate materialism; it was necessary  always to remember that theie was the spiritual beyond the material. 

