[Q. 10] Why is the violet, the colour of the Linga-Śarīra, placed at the apex Δ 
of the Δ. when the Macrocosm is figured as □, thus throwing the yellow - Buddhi into the lower quaternary? 
[A.] It is wrong to speak of the “lower quaternary” in the Macrocosm. It is the  Tetraktys, the highest, the most sacred of all symbols. There comes a moment when, in the highest meditation, the Lower Manas is withdrawn into the Triad, which thus becomes the Quaternary, the Tetraktys of Pythagoras, leaving what was the Quaternary as the lower Triad, which is then reversed. The triad is reflected in the Lower Manas. The Higher Manas can not reflect itself, but when the Green passes upwards it becomes a mirror for the Higher; it is then no more green, having passed from its associations. The psyche then becomes spiritual, the Ternary is reflected in the fourth, and the Tetraktys is formed. So long as you are not dead, there must be something to reflect the higher Triad; for there must be something to bring back to the waking consciousness the experiences passed through on the higher plane. The  lower manas is as a tablet which records the things seen in trance. 
The Turīya state is entered on the “Fourth Path”; it is figured in the diagram on p. 16 of the Instructions No. II.3 
The Δ outside: 
[Q. 1 1 ] What is the meaning of a Δ formed of lines of light, appearing in the  midst of intense vibrating blue? 
[A.] Seeing the Δ outside is nothing. It is merely a reflection of the Triad on the  Auric Envelope, and proves that the seer is outside the Δ. It should be seen in quite another way. You must endeavour to merge yourself in it, and assimilate yourself with it. You are merely seeing things in the Astral. “When the third eye is opened  in any one of you, you will have something very different to tell me.” 
3The diagram on p. 564 of Instuction No II in H.P. Blavatsky Collected Writings, vol. XII
16  “Pass-not”: 
[Q. 12] With reference to the “Pillar of Light” in Question 3,4 is the Auric envelope  the Higher Ego, and does it correspond to the ring Pass-not? 
[A.] The question was not answered, as going too far. The ring Pass-not is at the  end of the manifested Universe. 
Nidanas: 
[Q. 13] The root of the Nidānas is Avidyā: How does this differ from Māyā? How  many Nidānas are there esoterically? 
[A.] Again, asks too much. The Nidanas, the concatenation of causes and effects  (not in the sense of the Orientalists) are not all caused by ignorance. They are produced by Devas and Dhyāni-Chohans, who certainly cannot be said to act in ignorance. We produce Nidānas in ignorance. Each cause started on the physical plane sets up action on every plane to all eternity. They are eternal effects, reflected from plane to plane  on to “the screen of eternity”. 
Manas and its Divisions: 
[Q. 14] What is the septenary classification of Manas? There are seven degrees  of the Lower Manas, and presumably seven degrees of the Higher. Are there then  14 degrees of Manas: or is Manas, taken as a whole, divided into 49 mānasic fires? 
[A.] Certainly there are 14, but you want to run before you can walk. First learn  the three, and then go on to the 49. There are three sons of Agni; they become seven, and their sons are 49. But the students are still ignorant to produce the 3. Learn first how to produce the “sacred fire” spoken of in the Pur anas.’’ The 49 fires are all states of Kundalinī, to be produced in ourselves by the friction of the Triad. First learn the septenary of the body, and then that of each principle. But first of all learn  
the first triad (the three vital airs) as directed in Lessons 1 and 2. 
4 See p. 7. 
5 Visnu-Purāna, I, x ; Vāyu-Purāna, I, 29 ; Matsya-Purāna, 5 1 .
Meeting No. Ill: September 17, 1890 17 
Colours and Cord: 
[Q. 15] The Nādis extend from the lowest lumbar vertebra to the atlas. Have iliese any physical correspondence in the spinal cord, which extends only from the first lumbar vertebra to the atlas? and does the region through which the colours are to be raised correspond with the entire length of the cerebral canal, which, in the adult,  
terminates on the coccyx6? 
[A.] The coccyx is the great line of demarcation between the animal and the man. It is the place where the man ends and the animal begins. If, then, you pass beyond it, you pass to the animal and into black magic. Therefore the lower a of the Ten is below the lumbar vertebrae, and the concentration must begin at the vertebra where the spinal cord begins, and never below it. H.P.B. said she had seen (he chelas, mounting the seven steps of the spine, close the ears, nostrils, eyes, and 
lastly the mouth, holding the breath for a short time. She herself did not use the colours above the atlas; on arriving there, as she phrased it, she “went home”. On  arriving at the foramen, the current will go on by itself. It was necessary to watch  die colours changing like a rainbow, but always mentally thinking one’s own colour. If the effort upwards was unsuccessful, we might lead the fire downwards again - being very careful not to go below the point where the cord stops, because of the animal regions beyond - and then make a fresh effort. The danger of trying lo force the current beyond the foramen, was that we might injure the ganglia of the brain if we went off the right track. The colours are psychic. But sounds are spiritual, and when these are reached the colours are left behind. We should try to obtain coloured  sounds. 
The Sympathetic Nerve: 
[Q. 16] What is the sympathetic nerve, and its function in occultism? It is found  only after a certain stage of animal evolution, and would seem to be evolving in  complexity towards a second spinal cord. 
[A.] At the end of the next Round humanity will again become male-female, and  then there will be two spinal cords. In the seventh race the two will merge into the  one. The evolution corresponds to the Races, and with the evolution of the races the  sympathetic develops into a true spinal cord. We are returning up the arc, only with  self-consciousness added. The 6th Race will correspond to the “pudding-bags”, but 
6 Th e t a il b o ne

18  will have the perfection of form with the highest intelligence and spirituality. Anatomy and Occultism: 
Anatomists are beginning to find new ramifications and new modifications in the human body. They are in error on many points; e.g. as to the spleen, which they call the manufactory of the white blood corpuscles, but which is really the vehicle of the Linga-Śarīra. Occultists know each minute portion of the heart, and have a  name for each. They call them by the names of the Gods, as Brahma’s Hall, Visnu’s Hall, etc. They correspond with parts of the brain. The very atoms of the body are  the 33 crores of Gods. 
The sympathetic nerve is played on by the Tāntrikas, who call its Siva’s Vinā. Prāna: 
[Q. 17 ] What is the relation of man to Prāna, the periodical life? 
[A.] Jīva becomes Prāna only when the child is born and begins to breathe. It  is the breath of life, Nephesh. There is no Prāna on the Astral Plane. 
Antahkarana: 
[Q. 18] Antahkarana is the link between the Higher and the Lower Egos; does  it then correspond to the umbilical cord of the astral in projection? 
[A.] No: The umbilical cord joining the astral to the physical body is a real thing. Antahkarana is imaginary, a figure of speech, and is only the process of bridging over from the Higher to the Lower Manas. Antahkarana only exists when you commence  to “throw your though upwards and downwards”. 
The Māyāvi-Rūpa, or Mānasic body, has no material connection with the  physical body, no “umbilical cord”. It is spiritual and ethereal, and passes everywhere without let or hindrance. It entirely differs from the astral body, which, if injured,  acts by repercussion on the physical body. 
The Devachanic entity, even previous to birth, can be affected by the Skandhas,  but these have nothing to do with Antahkarana. It is effected, e.g. by the desire for  reincarnation.
Meeting No. Ill: September 17, 1890 19 
Antahkarana: 
[Q. 19] We are told in the Voice that we have to become “the Path itself’, and  in another passage that Antahkarana is that Path.7 Does this mean anything more  than that we have to bridge over the gap between the consciousness of the Higher  and the Lower Ego? 
[ A.] That is all. 
[Q. 20] We are told that there are seven Portals on the path;8 is there then a  sevenfold division of Antahkarana? Also, is Antahkarana the battlefield? 
[A.] It is the battlefield. There are seven divisions in Atahkarana; as you pass  from each to the next you approach the Higher Manas. When you have bridged the  4th, you may consider yourself fortunate. 
Aum: 
[Q. 21] We are told that “Aum should be practiced physically”.9 Does this mean  that colour being more differentiated than sound, it is only through the colours that  we shall get at the real sound for each one of us? That Aum can only have its spiritual and occult significance when tuned to the Ātma-Buddhi-Manas of each person? 
[A.] Aum means good action, not merely lip sound. You must say it in deeds. Planes: 
[Q. 22] With reference to the Δ is not the Ātma-Buddhi-Manas different for each  entity, according to the plane on which he is? 
[A.] Each principle is on a different plane. The Chela must rise to one after another, assimilating each, until the three are one. This is the real root of the Trinity. 
7 The Voice of the Silence, o r i g ina l e d itio n, p . 1 7 an d n o t e 12 o n p . 5 6 . 
8 Idem, p p 4 7 -8 , 
9 See p. 9, Question No 7

20  Manas and the A.E.: 
[Q. 23] In The Secret Doctrine we are told that Ākāśa is Pradhāna.10 Ākāśa is  the A.E. of the earth, and yet Ākāśa is Mahat. What then is the relation of Manas  to the A.E.? 
[A.] Mūlaprakrti is Ākāśa (7 degrees). Mahat is the positive aspect of Ākāśa, and is the Manas of the Kosmic body. Mahat is to Ākāśa as Manas to Buddhi. Pradhāna is  but another name for Mūlaprakrti. 
The A[uric] Envelope is Ākāśa and has seven degrees. Being pure abstract  substance, it reflects abstract ideas, but also reflects lower concrete things. The 3rd  Logos and Mahat are one, and are the same as Universal Mind, Alaya. 
Tetraktys: 
(The Tetraktys is Catur-Vidyā, or the fourfold knowledge in one, the fourfold  Brahmā.) 
'°The Secret Doctrine, v o l I, o r i g in a l e d ition , p . 2 5 6 .
21 
Meeting No. IV: September 24,1890 
Present: C.W., A.B., I.C.-O., C.F.W., G.R.S.M., A.K., H.A.W.C.,  
A.L.C., L.[M.]C„ W.R.O. 
(The last named took the Pledge.) 
Nadis: 
[Q. 25] Have the Nādis any fixed relationship to the vertebrae; can they be located opposite, or between, any vertebrae: Can they be regarded as occupying each a given and fixed extent of the spinal cord; do they correspond to the divisions of the cord  known to anatomists? 
[A.] H.P.B. believed that the Nādis correspond to the divisions of the cord known to anatomists. There are thus 6 or 7 Nādis - or plexuses - along the Spinal Cord. The term however is not technical but general, and is applied to any knot, centre, or ganglia. The sacred Nādis are those which run above or along Susumnā. Six are known to science, and one (near the atlas) unknown. Even the Tāraka Rāja Yogas  speak only of six and will not mention the sacred seventh. 
Idā and Pingalā: 
Ida and Pingalā play along the curved walls of the cord, in which is Susumnā.  They are semi-material, positive and negative, Sun and Moon, and start into action  the free and spiritual current of Susumnā. They have distinct paths of their own,  otherwise they would radiate all over the body. By concentration on Idā and Pingalā  is generated the “sacred fire”. 
Śiva’s Vina: Triveni: 
Another name of Siva’s Vīnā (sympathetic) is Kāli’s Vinā. The sympathetic nerve and Ida and Piiigalā start from a sacred spot above the Medulla Oblongata called Trivenī This is one of the sacred centres, another of which is the Brahmarandhra, which is if you like - the grey matter of the brain; it is also the anterior fonlanelle  
in the newborn child

22  Brahmadanda: 
The spinal column is called Brahmadanda, or the “stick of Brahma”; this is again symbolized by the bamboo-rod carried by ascetics. The Yogis on the other side of the Himalayas who assemble regularly at Lake Mānasarovara, carry a triple- knotted  bamboo-stick; and are called Tridandas. 
Brāhmana Initiation: 
This has the same signification as the Brāhmanical Cord, which has many other  meanings besides the three vital airs; e.g. it symbolizes the 3 initiations of a  Brāhmana, which take place; (a) at birth, when he receives his mystery-name from  the family astrologer, who is supposed to have received it from the Devas (he is also 
thus said to be initiated by the Devas). A Hindu will sooner die than reveal this name:  (b) at seven years of age, when he receives the cord: and (c) at eleven or twelve, when  he is initiated into his caste. 
Body and Astral body: 
[Q. 26] If the physical body is no part of the human septenary, is the physical  material world one of the seven planes of the cosmic septenary? 
[A.] It is: the body is not a principle in esoteric parlance, because the Body and  the Linga-Śarīra are both on the same plane; then the A.E. makes the seventh: the  body is an Upādhi rather than a principle. 
Astral Light: 
The earth, with its Astral Light are as closely related to each other as the body  and its Linga, the earth being the Upādhi. Our plane in its lowest subdivisions is the  earth, in its highest the Astral. The terrestrial astral light should, of course, not be  confounded with the universal Astral Light. 
The number 14: 
The number 14 is the first step between the 7 and 49. Each septenary is really  14, because each of the 7 has its two aspects; thus 14 signifies the inter-relation of  the two planes in its turn. The septenary is to be clearly traced in the lunar months,  fevers, gestation, etc.: on it is based the week of the Jews, and the septenary  I lierarchies of the Lord of Hosts.

Meeting No. IV: September 24, 1890 23 
Seventh Degree: 
[Q. 27] A physical abject was spoken of as - on the physical - a septenary, in as  much as (1) we could directly contact it; (2) retinally reproduce it; (3) remember  il, (4) dream of it; (5) view it anatomically; and (6) view it as disintegrated;" - what  is the 7th? 
[A.] The 7th bridges across from one plane to another. The last is the idea, the  privation of matter”, and carries you on to the next plane. The highest of one plane  touches the lowest of the next. Seven is a factor in nature, as in colour and sounds.  I here are 7 degrees in the same piece of wood, each perceived by one of the 7  senses. In wood the “smell” is the most material degree, while in other substances  it may be the 6th. Substances are septenaries apart from the consciousness of the  viewer. 
Psychometry: 
The Psychometer seeing a morsel of e.g. a table a thousand years hence, would  see the whole table, for every atom reflects the whole body to which it belongs, just  as with the Monads of Leibnitz. After the seven material divisions are the 7 divisions of the astral, which is its second principle. The disintegrated matter - the highest of the seven material subdivisions - is the privation of the idea of it - the 4th. Sound: 
[Q. 28] Sound is an attribute of Ākāśa. But we cannot cognize anything on the  astral plane; on what plane then, do we recognize sound? On what plane is sound  produced by the physical contact of bodies? Is there sound on 7 planes? and is the  physical plane one of them? 
[A.] The physical plane is one of them. You cannot see Ākāśa, but you can sense it from the 4th Path. You may not be fully conscious of it, and yet you may sense it. Ākāśa is at the root of the manifestation of all sounds. Sound is the expression and manifestation of that which is behind it, which is the parent of many correlations. All Nature is a Sounding-Board, or rather Ākāśa is the Sounding- Board of Nature. 
It is the Deity, the One Life, the One Existence. 
11 See p. 14, 3rd paragraph

24  
Sound can have no end. H.P.B. remarked, with regard to a tap made by a pencil  on a table:- “By this time it has affected the whole Universe. The particle which has  its wear and tear, destroys something which passes into something else. It is eternal  in the Nidānas it follows.” A sound if not previously produced on the Astral plane,  and before that in the Ākāśa, could not be produced at all. 
Ākāśa is the bridge between nerve cells and mental powers. 
Senses and Races: 
[Q. 29] Colours are psychic and sounds are spiritual. What, assuming that these  are vibrations, is the successive order (these corresponding to sight and hearing) of  the other senses? 
[A.] This phrase was not to be taken out of its context, otherwise confusion would arise. All are on all planes. The First Race had touch all over, like a sounding-board; this touch differentiated into the other senses, which developed with the Races. The sense of the first Race (“Pudding Bags”) was that of Touch, meaning the power of their  
atoms to vibrate in unison with external atoms. This “touch” would be almost the same  thing as sympathy. 
The senses were on a different plane with every race; e.g., the 4th Race had very  much more developed senses than ourselves, but on another plane. It was also a very material Race. The 6th and 7th senses will merge into the Ākāśic Sound. It depends to what degree of matter the sense of touch relates itself, as to what we shall call it. 
Correspondences: 
[Q. 30] If it is right to study the body and its organs, with their correspondences,  will you give the main outline of these in connection with the Nādis and with the  diagram of the orifices?12 

[A.] The Spleen corresponds to  " Liver 
" Heart 
Linga-Śarīra.  Kāma. 
Prāna. 



Meeting No. IV: September 24, 1890 25 
The Corpora-quadrigemina13 to Kāma-Manas. 
Pituitary Body " Manas-Antahkarana. 
Pineal Gland " Manas, until it is touched by 
the vibrating light of Kundalim which proceeds from Buddhi, when it becomes  Buddhi-Manas. 
The Pineal corresponds with Divine Thought. 
Psychic Vision and Pituitary Body: 
Psychic vision is caused by the molecular motion of the Pituitary body, which  is directly connected with the optic nerve, and thus affects the sight, and gives rise  to hallucinations. Its motion may readily give rise to flashes of light, such as may  be obtained by pressing the eye-balls. 
Drunkenness and Fever: 
These produce illusions of sight and brain by the action of the Pituitary. This  body is sometimes so affected by drunkenness that it is paralyzed. If an influence  on the optic nerve is induced - and thus reversed - the colours will probably be  complementary. 
Exercise: 
On reaching the Pituitary Body, if the colour seen is your own colour, cross to  the Pineal; your own colour will protect you. If it is not, then commence the exercise  again. 
Realise the Δ apart from the colour-work. 
Prāna: 
[Q. 31] Is Prāna the production of the countless “lives” of the human body, and  therefore to some extent of the congeries of the cells, or atoms, of the body? 
[A.] No; Prāna is the parent of the “lives”. As an example, a sponge may be  immersed in an ocean. The water in the sponge’s interior may be compared to 
13 Four small swell in gs of the midbrain roof.

26  
Prāna; outside to Jīva. Prāna is the motor-principle in life. The “lives” leave Prāna,  Prāna does not leave them. Take out the sponge from the water and it becomes dry,  thus symbolizing death. Every principle is a differentiation of Jīva, but the life- motion in each is Prāna, the “breath of life”. Kāma depends on Prāna, without which there would be no Kāma. Prāna wakes the Kāmic germs to life, it makes all desires vital  and living. 
Sympathetic Nerve: 
[Q. 32] With reference to Question 16,14what is it that will become a second spinal  cord in the 6th Race? Will Ida and Pingalā have separate physical ducts? 
[A.] It is the sympathetic cords which will grow together and form another spinal cord. Idā and Pingalā will be joined with Susumnā and they will become one. Ida is  on the left side of the cord and Pingalā on the right. 
September, 1890. Teaching suspended by order.15 
I4See p. 17. 
15 Alice Leighton Cieather says in her H.P. Blavatsky. Her Life and Work for Humanity, Calcutta  1922, p 48: “...the Inner Group... was suspended for a short time, by the Master's order, not long alter  its formation, for unseemly wranglings between two of its members.”

27 
Meeting: November 12, 189016 
After prolonged discussion, the group resolved to bind itself together by a special pledge. There was a division of opinion as to how far the Pledge should extend, and  finally the following form was adopted and signed by all present. 
(E.T. Sturdy and G. Kislingbury had severally taken the Pledge of the Inner Group  during the suspension.) 
“We, the undersigned, pledge ourselves, each to each, to remain and work  together in Occultism for the remainder of our lives. 
We pledge ourselves to make the residence of the majority of the members of  our Body, after the death of H.P.B., the headquarters of the Society. We pledge ourselves to refer to the judgment of our Body any private matter  that may directly or indirectly affect our common interest - Theosophy. We pledge ourselves to be ready to give a frank explanation to our Body on any  matter which has given rise to question, and generally to cultivate frankness of dealing  with each other.” 
“So help us, our Higher Self.” 
I. M. Cooper A. Besant I. Cooper-Oakley C. Wright H. A.W. Coryn E.T. Sturdy W.R. Old C. Wachtmeister E. Kislingbury G.R.S. Mead 
H.P.B. said that the I.G. was the Manas of the T.S. The E.S. was the Lower  Manas; the T.S. the Quaternary. 
16 This meeting is not numbered in the Minutes