28 
Meeting No. V: November 26,1890 
Present: L.[M.]C., I.C.-O., W.R.O., E.K., E.T.S., A.B., C.F.W.,  
H.A.W.C., C.W., G.R.S.M., A.L.C. 
(The last named took the special pledge.) 
Kosmic Consciousness: 
H.P.B. proceeded to deal with Kosmic Consciousness, which is like all else, on  seven planes, of which three are inconceivable, and four are cognizable by the highest  Adept. 
Manas-Ego. 
Kāma-Manas, or Higher  
Psychic. Prānic-Kāma, or Lower  
Psychic Astral 
Prakrti 
Terrestrial 
Prakrti Consciousness: 
H.P.B. then took the lowest only, the Terrestrial (it was afterwards decided to  call this plane Prakrti), it is divisible into seven planes, and these again into seven,  making the 49. 
Terrestrial Consciousness: 
H.P.B. then took the lowest plane of Prakrti, or the true Terrestrial, and divided  it into seven.

Meeting No. V: November 26,1890 29 
True terrestrial  
planes, or  
7th Prakrti 
Para-Ego - changed to Ātmic.  
Inner Ego - " " Buddhic.  
Manas Ego. 
Kāma-Manas, or Lower Manas, or Higher Psychic.  
Prānic-Kāma, or Lower Psychic. 
Astral. 
Objective. 
1 This objective, or sensuous, plane is that which is sensed by the five physical  senses. 
2 On its second plane, objects are reversed. 
3 Its third plane is psychic, here is the instinct which prevents a kitten going into  the water and getting drowned. 
The following table of the terrestrial consciousness was given:- 
1. Sensuous. 
2. Instinctual. 
3. Physiological emotional. 
4. Passional " 
5. Mental " 
6. Spiritual 
7. X. 
These are related to the Astral Plane immediately succeeding. 
Astral X. 
" Buddhic.  
" Mānasic. 
" K[āma]-Mānasic. 
" Psychic, or Prānic Terrestrial. 
" Astral.. 
" Objective.

30  Astral Consciousness: 
With regard to the first division of the second plane, H.P.B. reminded us that all  seen on it must be reversed in translating it, e.g. numbers appear backwards. The  Astral Objective corresponds to the terrestrial objective. 
The second division corresponds to the second of the terrestrial plane, but the  objects are of extreme tenuity, an astralized astral. This plane is the limit of the ordinary medium, beyond which he cannot go. A non-mediumistic person, to reach it, must be asleep, or in a trance, or under the influence of laughing gas. In ordinary delirium  people pass on to this plane. 
The third plane, the Prānic, is of an intensely vivid nature. Extreme delirium carries the patient to this plane. In delirium tremens the sufferer passes to this and to the one above it. Lunatics are often conscious on this plane, where they see the terrible  visions. It runs into - 
The fourth division, the world of the Astral Planes, Kāmic and terrible. Hence  come the images that tempt; images of drunkards in Kāma-Loka impelling others  to drink; images of all vices inoculating men with the desire to commit crimes. The  weak imitate these images in a kind of monkeyish fashion, so falling beneath their  influences. This is also the cause of epidemics of vices, and cycles of disaster, accidents  of all kinds coming in groups. Extreme delirium tremens is on this plane. 
The fifth division is that of premonitions in dreams, of reflections from the lower mentality, glimpses into the past and future, the plane of things mental and not spiritual. The mesmeric clairvoyant can reach this plane, and can even - if good - go higher. 
The sixth is the plane whence come all beautiful inspirations of art, poetry, and  music; high types of dreams, flashes of genius. Here we have glimpses of past  incarnations, without being able to locate or analyse them. C.W. saw the Master here when she looked down on her own Kāmic body, being then above the Kāmic plane. 
We are on the seventh plane at the moment of death, or in exceptional visions.  The drowning man is here when he remembers his past life. The memory of events  on this plane must be centered in the heart, the “Seal of Buddha”; there it will remain.  But impressions on this plane are not made on the physical brain.
Meeting No. V: November 26, 1890 31 
General Notes: 
The two planes above dealt with are the only 2 planes used in Hatha-Yoga. The  Pratyeka-Buddhas do not go beyond the 3rd Kosmic plane. They have conquered all their material desires, but have not yet freed themselves from their mental and  spiritual. 
Prāna and the Auric Envelope are essentially the same, and again, as Jīva, it is  the same as the Universal Deity. This, in its 5th principle is Mahat, in its 6th Ālaya. ( The Universal Life is also seven-principled.) 
Mahat is the highest Entity in Kosmos; beyond this is no diviner Entity; it is of  the subtlest matter, Sūksma. In us this is Manas, and the very Logoi are less high,  not having gained experience. The Mānasic Entity will not be destroyed, even at the end of the Mahā-Manvantara, when all the gods are absorbed, but will re- emerge  from Parabrahmic latency. 
Consciousness is the kosmic seed of super-Kosmic Omniscience. It has the  potentiality of budding into the Divine Consciousness. 
Rude physical health is a drawback to seership. This was the case with  Swedenborg.
32 
Meeting No. VI: December 3,1890 
Present: C.W., H.A.W.C., A.L.C., E.K., G.R.S.M., I.C.-O-, L.M.C.,  W.R.O., A.B., C.F.W. 
H.P.B. continued to explain the planes of consciousness. 
Kosmos Diagram I. 
General Notes on Kosmic  
Septenary Fohat: 
Fohat is everywhere; it runs like a thread through all and has its own 7 divisions. Auric Envelope: 
In the Kosmic Auric Envelope is all the Karma of the manifesting Universe; this  is the Hiranyagarbha. 
J7va is everywhere; so with (he other principles.

Meeting No. VI: December 3, 1890 33 
“Prakrti” (I) Plane of Kosmos Diagram II 
The diagram (II) represents the type of all Solar Systems. 
General Notes: 
Taking the figure to represent the human principles and planes of  consciousness, then: - 
7, 6, 5, = Siva, Visnu, Brahma; Brahma being the lowest. 
Siva, Visnu, Brahma: 
Siva is the four-faced Brahman, the Creator, preserver, Destroyer  and Regenerator. 
Between 5 and 4 comes the Antahkarana.
34  
The Δrepresents the Christ, the sacrificial victim crucified between the two  thieves; this is the “double-faced” Entity. 
Vedanta: 
TheVedāntinsmakethis□forablind;viz.:Ahamkāra,Cit,BuddhiandManas.  
1 ST (Prakrti) Plane, Diagram III subdivided = Our Earth.  
(The Visible Universe 
is on this Plane). 

The Septenary of Consciousness of the Terrestrial Objective Plane. 
Notes: 
Perceptive life begins with the Astral; it is not our physical atoms which see, etc. 
Consciousness proper begins between Kāma and Manas. Ātma-Buddhi acts  more in the atoms of the body, in the bacilli, microbes, etc. than in man  himself.
Meeting No. VI: December 3,1890 35 
1. Sensuous, objective consciousness: 
all that pertains to the five physical senses in man, animals, birds, fishes and  some insects, etc. Here are the “Lives”; their consciousness in Ātma-Buddhic; these  lire without manas entirely. 
2. Astral Consciousness: 
viz. that of plants (sensitive), of ants, spiders, and also some night flies (Indian),  but not of bees. The vertebrate animals are without this consciousness, but the  placental animals have all the potentiality of man-consciousness, though of course  it is at present dormant. Idiots act on this plane; the common phrase, “he has lost  his mind”, is an occult truth. For when through fright, etc. the lower mind becomes  paralyzed, then the consciousness acts on the astral plane. The study of lunacy will  throw much light on this point. This may well be called the “nerve-plane”; it is not  cognized by our “nervous senses”, of which physiology knows nothing:- Ex[amples]: Clairvoyant reading with the eyes bound, from the pit of the stomach, etc. This is  greatly developed in the deaf and dumb. 
3. Kāma-Prānic Consciousness: 
the general life consciousness which belongs to all the objective world, even to  the stones; for if the stone were not sentient it could not emit a spark. Affinity between chemical elements is a manifestation of this Kāmic consciousness. Again, there,  where there is decay, must also be life, etc. Stones crumble away. 
4. Kāma-Mānasic Consciousness: 
the instinctual consciousness of animals and idiots in its lowest degrees; the planes of sensation; in man these are rationalized, e.g., a dog shut up in a room has the instinct to get out, but cannot because its instinct is not sufficiently rationalized;  whereas a man at once takes in the situation and extricates himself. The highest  degree of this Kāma-Mānasic consciousness is the psychic (Ex[ample]: when under  laughing-gas). Thus there are seven degrees, from the instinctual animal to the  rationalized instinctual, or psychic. 
5. Manasic  
Consciousness: hence Manas stretches up to Mahat.

36  6. Buddhic Consciousness: 
the plane of Buddhi and the Auric Envelope; from here it goes to the “Father in  Heaven” (Ātman) and reflects all that is in the Auric Envelope. Five and Six,  therefore, cover the planes from the psychic to the Divine. 
Notes: 
Reason is a thing which wavers between right and wrong; but Intelligence  (Intuition) is higher, it is the clear vision. To get rid of Kāma-Rūpa, we must crush  all our material instincts (“crush out matter”). “The flesh” is a thing of habit, it will  repeat mechanically a good impulse as well as a bad. It is not the flesh which is  always the tempter, in nine cases out of ten it is the Lower Manas which, by its  images, brings the flesh into temptation. 
Samādhi: 
The highest Adept begins his Samādhi on the fourth Solar plane, but cannot go  out of the Solar system; when he begins Samādhi he is on a par with some of the  Dhyāni-Chohans, but transcends them as he rises to the seventh plane (Nirvana). 
Silent Watcher:  
The Silent Watcher is on the fourth Kosmic Plane. 
Will, Desire: 
The Higher Mind directs the Will, the Lower turns it into selfish desire. 
The Dhyāni-Chohans are passionless, pure, and mindless; they have no struggle,  no passions to crush. 
Pitrs: 
The Pitre are the “Astral” overshadowed by Ātma-Buddhi, which was attracted  to matter. The “puddings”17 had Life and Ātma-Buddhi, but no Manas. They were  therefore senseless. 
17 See the answer on Question 29, p. 24.
Meeting No. VI: December 3, 1890 37 
The Great “Why”: 
The reason of all evolution is the gaining of experience. The Dhyāni-Chohans are  made to pass through the “schools of life”:- “God goes to school”. 
Astral: 
The Astral Body is first in the womb; then comes the germ and fructifies it; it  is then clothed in matter just like the Pitrs. 
Chhāyā: 
The Chhāyā is really the Lower Manas, the Shadow (of the Higher Mind); this  Chhāyā makes the Māyāvi-Rūpa. The Ray clothes itself in the highest (7th) degree  of the Astral Plane. In the fifth Round all of us will play the part of Pitrs; we shall  have to go and shoot out our Chhāyās into another humanity, and remain until that  humanity is perfected. 
The Pitrs have finished their office in this Round and have gone into Nirvāna,  but will return to do the same office up to the middle point of the next Round. The  fourth, or Kāmic, Hierarchy of the Pitrs becomes the man of flesh. 
The A.E.: 
The A.E. takes up the light of Ātman and overshadows the coronal, and circles  round the head. 
Additional Notes (from A.B.’s book): 
“The best of us in the future will be the Mānasaputras, the lowest will be Pitrs. We arc seven intellectual Hierarchies here. This earth becomes the Moon of  the next earth.” (H.P.B.) 
A question was asked:- “Does the Māyāvi-Rūpa have its laya centre in the heart?” H.P.B.: “The Māyāvi-Rūpa is composed of the Astral body as Upādhi, the guiding intelligence from the heart, the attributes and qualities from the Auric  Envelope.”18 
18 This and Ihc previous paragraph can also be found, with a slightly different text, in the Notes of  Isabel Coopcr-Oakly, published in The Theosophist, vol. 52b, p. 303. The heading in The Theosophist  is "At Secret I toctrinc ( lass, December 4, 1890 ” There vrw.v such a Class on that date, as can be found  in the London Letter of Claude Falls Wright, published in The Path, New York, November 1890, p.
38 
Meeting No. VII: December 17,1890 
Present: I.C.-O., E.K., W.R.O., C.F.W., E.T.S., A.L.C., G.R.S.M.,  
H.A.W.C., L.M.C., C.W., A.B. 
Auric Fluid: 
The Auric Fluid is a combination of the Life and Will principles, the Life and  the Will being one and the same in Kosmos. It emanates from the eyes and hands,  when directed by the will of the operator. 
Auric Light: 
The Auric Light surrounds all bodies; it is the “aura” emanating from them, whether they be animal, vegetable, or mineral. It is the light e.g. seen round magnets. The three Logoi: 
Ātma-Buddhi-Manas in man correspond to the three Logoi in Kosmos. They not  only correspond, but each is the radiation from Kosmos to Micro-Kosmos. The third Logos, Mahat, becomes Manas in man, Manas being only Mahat individualized, as the sun-rays are individualized in bodies that absorb them. The sun-rays give life, they fertilize what is already there, and the individual is formed. Mahat, so to say,  fertilizes, and manas is the result. 
Buddhi-Manas is the Ksetrajña. 
There are seven planes of Mahat, as of all else. 
Here H.P.B. drew two diagrams,  
illustrating different ways of repre 
A.E. 
senting the human principles. In the  first:- the two lower are disregarded,  they go out, disintegrate, are of no  account. Remain five, under the  radiation of Ātman.

Meeting No. VII: December 17, 1890 39 
In the second:- 
The lower quater 
nary is regarded as  
mere matter, objective illusion; and  
there remain Manas and the A.E., the higher principles being reflected in the A.E. 
In all these systems, remember the main principle, the descent and re-ascent of  the Spirit, in man as in Kosmos. The Spirit is drawn downwards as by spiritual  gravitation. 
Seeking further for the cause of this, the students were checked, H.P.B. giving  only a suggestion on the three Logoi:- 
1. Potentiality of mind (Absolute Thought). 
2. Thought in germ. 
3. Ideation in activity. 
Variation: 
Protective variation, e.g. identity of colouring of insect and of that on which it  feeds, was explained to be the work of Nature-elementals. 
Form: 
Form was on different planes, and the forms of one plane might be formless to  dwellers on another. The Kosmocratores build on planes in the Divine Mind, visible to them, though not to us. The principle of limitation - principium individuationis - is Form; this principle is Divine Law manifested in Kosmie matter, which in its essence is limitless. The A.E. is the limit of man, as Hiranyagarbha of the Kosmos. 
Kriyaśakti: 
The first step towards the accomplishment of Kriyaśakti is the use of the

40  
Imagination. To “imagine” a thing is to firmly create a model of what you desire,  perfect in all its details. The will is then brought into action, and the form is thereby  transferred to the objective world. This is creation by Kriyāśakti.

41 
Meeting No. VIII: December 24,1890 
Present: C.W., I.C.-O., G.R.S.M., C.F.W., A.L.C., A.B. 
(A conversation arose from a remark, made by H.P.B. earlier in the week, that  the sun was much younger than the moon; that at the end of the Solar Manvantara,  the Sun would break up into innumerable fragments, each of which - flying off into  space - would gather fresh matter, and would ultimately form a planet in a new solar 
system. The septenary in nature was the clue to the fact that the moon, which had sent its principles into the laya centre where we were formed, was septenary. Other  worlds are built on numbers: e.g. the Sun is built on Ten. 
The conversation was somewhat desultory.) 
Suns and Planets: 
A comet partially cools and settles down as a sun. It then gradually attracts round it planets that are, as yet, unattached to any centre; and thus, in the course of millions of years, a solar system is formed. The worn-out planet becomes a moon to the  planet of another system. 
The Sun we see is a reflection of the true Sun. This reflection, as an outward  concrete thing, is a Kāma-Rūpa, all the Suns forming the Kāma-Rūpa of the Kosmos. To its own system the Sun is Buddhi, as being the reflection and vehicle of the true Sun - which is Ātman - invisible on this plane. All the Fohatic forces - electricity  etc. - are in this reflection. 
The Moon: 
At the beginning of the evolution of our globe, the Moon was much nearer to  the earth, and larger, than it is now. It has retreated from us, and shrunk much in  size. (The Moon gave all her principles to the earth, while the Pitrs only gave their  ChhĀyās to men.) 
The influences of the Moon are wholly psycho-physiological. It is dead, sending  out injurious emanations, like a corpse. It vampirises the earth and its inhabitants,  so that anyone sleeping in its rays suffers, losing some of its life-force. A white cloth is a protection, the rays not passing through it, and the head especially should be thus guarded. Ii has most power when it is full. It throws off particles which we

42 The Inner Group Teachíngs of H.P. Blavatsky 
absorb, and is gradually disintegrating. Where there is snow the moon looks like  a corpse, being unable through the white snow to vampirise effectively. Hence snow covered mountains are free from its bad influences. The Moon is phosphorescent. 
The Rāksasas of Lanka, and the Atlanteans, are said to have subjected the Moon.  The Thessalians learned from them their magic. 
Esoterically the Moon is the symbol of the Lower Manas; it is also the symbol  of the Astral. 
Plants which, under the Sun’s rays, are beneficent, are maleficent under those  of the Moon. Herbs containing poisons are most active when gathered under the  Moon-rays. 
A new Moon: 
A new Moon will appear during the 7th Round, and our Moon will finally  disintegrate and disappear. There is now a planet, the “mystery Planet”, behind the  Moon, and it is gradually dying. Finally, the time will come for it to send its principles to a new laya centre, and there a new planet will form, to belong to another solar system, the present “mystery Planet” there functioning as Moon to that new globe. This Moon will have nothing to do with our Earth, although it will come within the  range of vision. 
The Solar System: 
All the visible planets placed in our solar system, by astronomers, do belong to  it, except Neptune. There are also some others, not known to science, belonging to  it, and “all moons which are not yet visible for next things”. 
Precious Stones: 
In answer to a question, H.P.B. said that the diamond and the ruby were under  the sun, the sapphire under the moon, - but “what does that matter to you?”




