
43 
Meeting No. IX: December 31,1890 
Present: A.B., C.W., E.K., L.M.C., H.A.W.C., A.L.C., G.R.S.M.,  
I.C.-O., W.R.O., C.F.W. 
Time: 
When out of the body, and not subject to the habit of consciousness formed by  others, time does not exist. 
Cycles: 
There are real and conventional cycles of time. Every day brings before our  consciousness events that have happened in the past, as we pass over the same ground in our cyclic journey. Cycles are measured by the consciousness of humanity, and not by Nature. It is because we are the same people as in the past epochs that these  events occur to us. 
Effects of Planets: 
The planets only move in our consciousness. The rulers of the seven secret planets  have no influence on this earth, as this earth has on other planets. 
Sun: 
It is the Sun and Moon which really have not only a mental but also a physical  effect. The effect of the Sun on humanity is connected with Kāma-Prāna, with the  most physical Kāmic elements in us; it is the vital principle which helps to growth. 
Moon: 
The effect of the Moon is chiefly Kāma-Mānasic, or psycho-physiological; it acts  on the psychological brain. 
Death: 
The Hindus look upon Death as impure, owing to the disintegration of the body,  and the passing from one plane to another.

44  Atoms: 
The Atoms are the “principles” of the molecules (six in number). The Atom - the hypothetical Atom of science - is on the seventh sub-plane of the seven Kosmic  planes, the material, visible, plane.
45 
Meeting No. X: January 7,1891 
Present: A.B., C.W., I.C.-O., L.M.C., A.L.C., W.R.O., C.F.W.,  
G.R.S.M., E.T.S., H.A.W.C., E.K. 
(Neither a dugpa, nor anyone else, can read your thoughts unless they are on his  own plane. Association - of ideas - is owing to the Law of Harmony.) 
H.P.B. began by saying that we ought to know the correct meaning of the Sanskrit terms used in Occultism, and should learn the Occult symbology. To begin with, we had better learn the correct esoteric classification and names of the fourteen (seven, etc., etc.) and seven (sapta) Lokas found in the exoteric texts. These were given in a  
very confused manner, and were full of blinds. 
Lokas: 
To illustrate this, three classifications were given:- 
(1) The general exoteric orthodox and Tantric category:- nothing but a list  of blinds:- 
Bhur Loka 
Bhuvar II 
Svar II 
Mahar II 
Jana " 
Tapar II 
Satya II 
(2) The Samkhya, and of some Vedantins:- 
Brahma Loka 
Pitr II 
Soma II 
Indra II 
Gandharva " 
Raksasa II
(second seven reflected) (the Highest) 
46 The InnerGroupTeachings of H.P.Blavatsky 
Yaksa Loka 
Piśācha " (of ghosts, Kāma-loka) 
(3) The Vedāntin, the nearest approach to the Esoteric:- 
1. A-tala 
2. Vi-tala 
3. Su-tala 
4. Talā-tala (Kara-tala) 
5. Rasā-tala 
6. Mahā-tala 
7. Pā-tala 
Each and all correspond esoterically both to the Kosmic and Dhyāni-Chohanic  Hierarchies, and to the human states of consciousness and their (49) subdivisions.  To appreciate this, the meanings of the terms used in the Vedāntic classification must  be first understood. 
Tala means Place, etc.:- 
1. Atala - no-place. 
2. Vitala - Some change for the better; i.e. better for matter, in that more  matter enters into it; or, in other words, it becomes more differentiated. This  is an ancient occult term. 
3. Sutala - good, excellent, place. 
4. Karatala - something that can be grasped and touched (from Kara - Hand); i.e. the state where matter becomes tangible. 
5. Rasātala - “place of taste”; a place you can sense with one of the organs of  sense. 
6. Mahātala - exoterically “great place”, but esoterically a place including all  others, subjectively and potentially, including all preceding it. 
7. Pāíāla - something under the feet (from Pāda - foot); the upādhi or basis of  anything, Antipodes, America, etc.
Meeting No. X: January 7, 1891 47 
Pañcha maha Bhutas, Tattvas, etc:19 
Each of these Lokas, places, worlds, states etc., corresponds with and is transformed into five (exoterically) and seven (esoterically) states or Tattvas, for which there are no definite names. These in the four main divisions, cited below, make up the 49  Fires. 
5 and 7 Tanmātras, outer and inner  
senses. 5 and 7 Bhūtas, or elements. 
5 and 7 Jñānêndriyas, organs of sensation.  
5 and 7 Karmêndriyas, organs of action. 
These correspond in general to states of consciousness, to the Hierarchies of  Dhyāni-Chohans, etc. These five Tattvas transform themselves into the world of  illusion. 
Lokas: 
The 14 Lokas are made up of 7 with 7 reflections:- above, below - within, without  - subjective, objective - pure, impure - positive, negative - etc., etc. 
Explanation of the States of Consciousness corresponding to  
the Vedāntic classification of Lokas:- 
1. Atala: 
the Ātmic, or Auric, state or locality; it emanates directly from the Absoluteness,  and is the first something in the Universe. Its correspondence is the Hierarchy of  non-substantial primordial beings; in a place which (to us) is no place; and a state  which (to us) is no state. litis Hierarchy contains the primordial plane, all that was,  is, and will be; from the beginning to the end of the Mahā-Manvantara, all is there.  This statement should not, however, be taken to imply fatality; the latter is contrary  to all the teachings of Occultism. 
19 Between brackets it says: “cf. S.D. i 572, note; ii 102, 372"; but in The Secret Doctrine, vol II, p. 372, nothing is said on bhutas or tattvas. Possibly it should be: S.D., II, 574
48  Dhyani-Buddhas: 
These are the Hierarchies of Dhyāni-Buddhas. Their state is that of Para Samādhi, of the Dharmakāya, a state where no progress is possible; the Entities there  may be said to be crystallized in purity, goodness, and homogeneity. 
2. Vitala: 
Here are the Hierarchies of the Celestial Buddhas, or Bodhisattvas, who are said  to emanate from the seven Dhyāni-Buddhas. 
It is related on earth to Samādhi, to the Buddhic consciousness in man. No S.W.20 adept, save one, can be higher than this and live; if he passes into the Atmic, or Dharmakāya state (Alaya), he can return to earth no more. These  two states are purely hyper-metaphysical. 
3. Sutala: 
A differentiated state, corresponding on earth with the H. Manas, and therefore  with Sabda (Sound), the Logos, our H. Ego; and also to the Manūsi-Buddha state,  like that of Gautama on earth. 
This is the third state of Samādhi (which is septenary). Here belong the Hierarchies of the Kumāras, Agnisvattas, etc. 
4. Kara tala: 
Corresponds with Sparśa (“touch”), and to the Hierarchies of ethereal, semi objective Dhyāni-Chohans of the astral nature of the Mānasa-Manas, or the pure  ray of Manas that is the L. Manas before it is mixed with Kāma (as in the young  child). They are called Sparśa Devas, the Devas endowed with “touch”. 
(These Hierarchies of Devas are progressive: the first has one sense, the second  two, and so on to seven. Each containing all the senses potentially, but not yet  developed. Sparśa would be better rendered by “affinity”, “contact”.) 
5. Rasātala: 
or Rūpatala, corresponds to the Hierarchies of Rūpa, or “sight”-Devas, 20 So the lay-out in the manuscript, possibly S.W means Sixth World

Meeting No. X: January 7,1891 49 
possessed of three senses (sight, hearing and touch). These are Kāma-Mānasic  entities, and the highest Elementals. With the Rosicrucians they were the Sylphs and Undines. It corresponds on earth to an artificial state of consciousness, such as that  produced by hypnotism and drugs (morphine, etc.). 
6. Mahātala: 
Corresponds to the Hierarchies of Rasa, or “taste”-Devas, and includes a state  of consciousness embracing the lower five senses, and emanations of life and being. It corresponds to Kāma and Prāna in man, and to Salamanders and Gnomes in  nature. 
7. Patāla: 
Corresponds to the Hierarchies of Gandha, or “smell”-Devas; the underworld  or antipodes - Myalba. The sphere of irrational animals, having no feeling save that  of self-preservation and gratification of senses; and also of intensely selfish human  beings, waking or sleeping. This is why Nārada is said to have visited Pātala,21 when 
he was cursed to be reborn; he reported that life there was very pleasant for those “who had never left their birthplace”, they were very happy. It is the earthly state, and corresponds to the sense of smell. Here are also animal dugpas, elementals of  animals, and nature-spirits. 
Further explanation of the same Classification:- 
I Auric, ātmic, ālayic sense, or state; one of full potentiality, but not of activity. 
2. Buddhic, the sense of being one with the Universe; the impossibility  of imagining itself apart from it. 
(It was asked why the term Alayic was here given to the Atmic, and not to the  Buddhic state? Ans.:- These classifications are not hard and fast divisions. A term  may change places according as the classification is exoteric, esoteric, or practical.  For the Inner Group the effort should be to bring all things down to states of  consciousness. Buddhi is one and indivisible really; it is a feeling within, absolutely  inexpressible in words. All cataloging is useless to explain it.) 
21 1 Visnu Purana, II, v, Mahabharata, V, ()7

50  3. Śabdic, sense of hearing. 
4. Sparśic, sense of touch. 
5. Rūpic, the state of feeling oneself a body, and perceiving it (Rūpa - form). 6. Rasic, sense of taste. 
7. Gandhic, sense of smell. 
All the Kosmic and anthropic (man) states and senses correspond with our organs of sensation, Jñanêndriyas, rudiments or organs for receiving knowledge through direct contact, sight, etc. These are the faculties of ŚarTra, through Netra - eyes,  nose, speech, etc. and also with the organs of action, Karmêndriyas, hands, feet, etc. 
Exoterically these are five sets of five, giving 25. Of these twenty are facultative  and five Buddhic. Exoterically Buddhi is said to perceive; esoterically it obtains  perception only through the H. Manas. 
Each of these twenty is either positive or negative, thus making forty in all. 
There are two subjective states answering to the four sets of five, hence 8 in all.  These being subjective cannot be doubled. Thus we have 40 + 8 = 48 “cognitions  of Buddhi”. These with Māyā, which includes them all, is 49. (Once you have reached  the cognition of Māyā, you are an Adept.)

Meeting: January 8,189122 
(Rai B.K. Laheri took the Pledge in the presence  of I.C.-O, L.M.C., W.R.O., C.F.W., and G.R.S.M.) 
22 This meeting is not numberedin the Minuets.

54 
Elements  
(Bhūtas)
Divine Lokas and  
States
Infernal (or Terrestrial)  Lokas and States
Planes of Corresponding  Hierarchies
Principles
1.Earth  
Bhūmi  
PrthivT
1. Bhūrloka. Habitat  of thinking and good  men. 
State - Psychic.
1. Pātāla. The dwelling place of man’s gross  
animal body and  
personality.
1. Abode of men,  
animals, state of infancy.  At one pole innocence, at  the other instinctual  
selfishness.
1. Body
2. Water  
Āpas
2. Bhuvarloka. The  
state in which a man  thinks more of his  
inner conditions than  of his personality. His  Astral passes into this  sphere, and so does its  
substance. 
State - Higher Psychic.
2. Mahātala. The abode  of man’s Astral, the  
shadow of the gross  
body; which shadow  
takes up the character istics of this sphere.  
(From Manas = Light,  and Mahā = Great.)
2. Region of the Astral  Light and of Kāma-Loka;  abode of Elementals;  
Nature-spirits; Elemen taries. At the other pole  the Rūpa Devas, the  
guardians of the animal  world. 
Plane of Instinct.
2. Astral  
Image
3. Air 
Vāyu
3. Svarloka. The state  where a Yogi has lost  all tastes, and started  towards Reunion.  
State - Holy.
3. Rasātala. Where the  Kāma longs for the taste  (rasa) of everything.
3. Devachanic state;  
abode or place of bliss  and unreasoned happi ness; of pure aspirations  and realizations; of  
Kāma-Manases; of  
Higher Elementals.
3. Kāma
4. Fire  
Agni  
Têjas
4. Maharloka. The  
state where the  
lower Manas has lost  all Kāmic affinity. 
State - Super Holy.
4. Talātala. Here lower  Manas clings to the  
objective and sentient  life; is Kāmic.
4. Plane where Māyā is  giving way, and be 
coming weak; abode of  the holiest among the  
Rūpa Devas. The sphere  of compassion at one end,  and that of intense  
selfishness at the other  [end].
4. Lower  
Mind
5. Ether 
5. Janarloka. The state  where the lower 
Manas is freed entirely  from Kāma, and be 
comes at one with the  Ego. 
State - Kumāra.
5. Sutala. Here lower  Manas becomes entirely  the slave of Kāma, and  at one with the animal  man.
5. Abode of Kumāras; the  sons of Mahat, or  
Brahmā; Omniscience  regarding all that belongs  to the realm of Māyā, and  is under its sway.
5. Higher  
Mind
6. Divine  
Flame
6. Taparloka. The state  where, even if the  
entity is reborn, it has  now become invulner able, inconsumable.  State - Innate Christos.
6. Vitala. When this is  reached, the higher  
breaks off from the  
lower entirely; the  
cord is snapped.
6. Plane of eternal incon sumable substance; of  Divine Fire. The abode of  Vairājas. The Pitr-Devas  of the Sun (SIX li, 89,  
90).
6. Buddhi
7. Ākāśa 
7. Satyaloka. The state  where the YogT  
reaches the highest  
Samādhi. He is on the  threshold of the Great  Choice.
7. Atala. Here a man  
dies but to be directly  reborn; “noplace”  
means no Devachan;  Spiritual death;  
annihilation.
7. Plane of the Consum mafum list in the Uni 
verse of Manifestation.  The Noumenal.
7. Atmic 
Auric