Notes: January 11,1891 55
Senses  
(Tanmātras)
Colours 
Conscious 
ness
Organs of  
Sensation  
(Jñānên 
driyas)
Organs of  
Action  
(Karmên 
driyas)
Corresponding Spiritual  Organs and Seats of  
Sensation
1. Smell  
(Gandha)
1. Blue 
1. Objective  
Perception.  
Smell
1. Nose 
1. Upastha:  
Organs of  
Generation
1. Root of nose, between  the eyebrows: highly  
developed in some  
animals.
2. Taste  
(Rasa)
2. Violet 
2. Instinctual  
Perception.  
Taste
2. Tongue 
2. Pāni  
Hands
2. Spleen and Liver; the  former more spiritual;  the latter on the material  plane: corresponds with  the little fingers of the  hands.
3. Sight  
(Rūpa)
3. Red 
3. Magnetic  
Perception.  
Light
3. Eyes 
3. Pada  
Feet
3. Stomach; corresponds  with the spine, and the  little toes of the feet.
4. Touch  
(Sparśa)
4. Green 
4. Psycho 
physiological  
Perception.  
Touch,  
Contact
4. Body 
4. Pāyu:  
Organs of  
evacuation,  excretion.
4. The region of the  
umbilical cord;  
corresponds with Pāyu;  for ejecting foreign  
magnetism.
5. Hearing  
(Sabda)
5. Indigo 
5. Mental,  
Purely.
5. Ears 
5. Vāc:  
Organ of  
speech.
5. The Heart (Spiritual)  and the Throat  
(physical).
6. Spiritual  
Under 
standing  
(Jñāna)
6. Yellow 
6. Soul  
Perceptions
6. Astral  
Body  
and  
Heart
6. Soul 
6. Pineal Gland.
7, The High 
er Synthetic  
Sense, em 
bracing all  
seven,
7.The en 
tire pris 
matic sep 
tenary  
When Au  
ric, blue,
7. Spiritual,  
through  
Auric, 
Sym 
pathetica!  
Perception.
7. Light of  
Kundalinī
7. Spirit 
7. The Ākāśa that fills  the skull, and for which  all the contents of the  latter - brain, glands,  
etc., are non-existent.




56  
Diagram, showing the Interblending of States of Consciousness  on the Planes (from E.T.S.’s Notebook) 
Bhūrloka  
Bhuvarloka  
Svarloka  
Maharloka  
Janarloka  
Taparloka  
Satyaloka 
Pātāla  
Mahātala  Rasātala  Talātala  Sutala 
Vitala  
Atala 
[On some of the lines is given a text. As it is not possible to give these texts within  the drawing in a readable form, the texts are given hereafter: 
Line Bhūrloka - Patala: Line Bhūrloka - Mahātala: 
Line Bhūrloka - Talātala: Line Bhūrloka - Sutala: 
Line Maharloka - Sutala: Line Maharloka - Vitala: Line Maharloka - Atala: 
Ordinary humanity  
Intellectual without Spiritual25 
Becomes demon in human  shape, but with plenty of capacity 
Not possible without fall 
" " " " 
" " " " 
25 It is not clear whether this is one sentence or two separate sentences.

57 
Meeting No. XI: January 14,1891 
Present: A.B., C.W., I.C.-O., L.M.C., E.K., E.T.S., G.R.S.M.,  
A.L.C., C.F.W., W.R.O. 
In answer to questions on the diagram, H.P.B. said that touch and taste have no  order. Elements have a regular order, but fire pervades them all. Every sense  pervades every other. There is no universal order, that being first in each (student)  which is most developed. 
Organs and States of Consciousness: 
Students must learn the correspondences; then concentrate on the organs, and  so reach their corresponding state of consciousness. Take them in order, beginning  with the lowest, and working steadily upwards. A medium might irregularly catch  glimpses of higher, but would not thus gain orderly development. 
Opposites: 
The Lokas and Talas are reflections the one of the other; so are the Hierarchies,  in pairs of opposites, at the two poles of the sphere. Everywhere are such opposites;  good and evil, light and darkness, male and female. 
Blue: 
H.P.B. could not say why blue was the colour of the earth. Blue is a colour by  itself, a primary. Indigo is a colour, and not a shade of blue. So is violet. 
Vairājas: 
The Vairājas belong to, are the fiery Egos of, other Manvantaras. They have already been purified in the fire of passions. It is they who refuse to create. They have  reached the 7th Portal, and have refused Nirvana, remaining for succeeding Manvantaras. 
Little finger: 
The greatest phenomena are produced by touching, and centring the attention  on the little finger.

58  Antahkarana: 
The seven steps of Antahkarana correspond with the Lokas. 
Samādhi: 
Samādhi is the highest state on earth that can be reached in the body. Beyond  that the Initiate must have become a Nirmānakāya. 
Purity: 
Purity of mind is of greater importance than purity of body. If the upādhi be not  perfectly pure, it cannot preserve recollections coming from a higher state. An act  may be performed to which little or no attention is paid, and it is of comparatively  small importance. But if thought of, dwelt on, in the mind, the effect is a thousand  times greater. The thought must be kept pure. 
Pratyeka Buddha: 
The Buddhists call the Pratyeka Buddha the rhinoceros, the solitary animal. Kāma: 
Remember that Kāma, while the parent of bad passions and emotions, helps you  to evolve, by giving also the desire and impulse necessary for rising. 
The Body: 
The flesh, the body, the human being in his material part, is - on this plane - the  most difficult thing to subject. The highest Adept, put into a new body, has to struggle  against and subdue it, and finds its subjugation difficult. 
Liver and Spleen: 
The Liver is the General, the spleen the A[ide]D[e]C[amp|. All that the Livei does  not accomplish is taken up and completed by the Spleen.

59 
Meeting No. XII: January 21,1891 
Present: A.B., C.W., I.C.-O., G.R.S.M., H.A.W.C., A.L.C., E.T.S.,  
E.K., W.R.O., C.F.W, 
H.P.B. was asked whether each person must pass through the 14 States? and  answered, that the Lokas and Talas represented planes on this earth, through some  of which all must pass; and through all of which the disciple must pass on his way  to Adeptship. Everyone passes through the lower Lokas, but not necessarily through 
the corresponding Talas. There are two poles in everything; seven states in every  state. 
Vitala: 
Vitala represents a sublime as well as an infernal state. That state which for the  mortal is a complete separation of the Ego from the personality, is for a Buddha a  mere temporary separation. For the Buddha it is a Kosmic state. 
Hells: 
The Brahmans and Buddhists regard the Talas as hells, but in reality the term  is figurative. We are in hell whenever we are in misery, suffer misfortunes, etc. H.P.B. remarked that the Group should come to some common understanding, to  some standard of agreement. She was anxious to give us facts which would lead us  to practical knowledge, but could not do so until we all understood in the same way  the instructions already given. 
Forms in the Astral Light: 
The Elemental in the Astral Light were reflections. Everything on earth is  reflected. It is from these that photographs are sometimes obtained through  mediums. The mediums unconsciously produce them as forms. Adepts produce them through Kriyāśakti, bringing them down by a process that may be compared lo the  focusing of rays of light by a burning glass.

60  States of consciousness: 
Bhūrloka is the waking state in which we normally live; it is the state in which  animals also are, when they sense food, a danger, etc. To be in Svarloka is to be  completely abstracted on this plane, leaving only instinct to work, so that on the  material plane you would behave as an animal. Yogīs are known who have become  crystallized in this state, and they then must be nourished by others. A Yogi near  Allahabad has been for fifty-three years sitting on a stone; his Chelas plunge him  into the river every night, and then replace him. During the day his consciousness  returns to Bhūrloka, and he talks and teaches. A Yogi was found on an island near  Calcutta, round whose limbs the roots of trees had grown. He was cut out, and in  the endeavour to awaken him so many outrages were inflicted on him that he died. 
Is it possible to be in more than one state of Consciousness at once? The  consciousness cannot be entirely on two planes of consciousness at once. The higher and lower states are not wholly incompatible, but if you are on the higher, you will woolgather on the lower. In order to remember the higher state on returning to the lower, the memory must be carried upwards to the higher. An Adept may apparently enjoy a dual consciousness; when he desires not to see he can abstract himself; he may be in a higher state and yet return to the material plane, shooting up again to the higher. This is the only salvation in adverse conditions. 
Intellect and Spirituality: 
The lower you go in the talas, the more intellectual you become, and the less  spiritual. You may be a morally good man, but not spiritual. Intellect may remain  very closely related to Kāma. A man may be in a loka, and visit one or all the Talas,  his condition depending on the loka to which he belongs. Thus a man in Bhūrloka  only may pass into the Talas, and may go to the devil. If he dwells in Bhuvarloka  he cannot become as bad. If he has reached the Satya state he can go into any Tala  without danger, buoyed up by his own purity he will never be engulfed. The Talas  are brain-intellect states while the lokas - or more accurately, the three higher - are  spiritual. (Thus M.M.C.26 was probably between Mahar and Janar when spiritual,  and between Talātala and Sutala in intellectual). 
The Three becoming One: 
Manas absorbs the light of Buddhi; Buddhi is arūpa and can absorb nothing. 2 6 M[rs] M[abel] C[ollins] or M[ohini] M[ohun] C[hatterjee]?
Meeting No. XII: January 21, 1891 61 
When the Ego takes all the light of Buddhi, it takes that of Ātman, Buddhi being  Ihe vehicle, and thus the three become one. 
This done, the full Adept is One spiritually, but has also a body; the fourfold path is finished and he is One. The Masters’ bodies are illusionary, and hence do not  grow old, become wrinkled, etc. 
The work of the student: 
The student who is not naturally psychic should fix the fourfold consciousness  on a higher plane and nail it there. Let him make a bundle of the four lower and pin  them to a higher state. He should centre on this higher, trying not to permit the  body and intellect to draw him down and carry him away. “Play ducks and drakes”  with the body, eating, drinking, and sleeping, but keeping always in the ideal. 
Mother-Love: 
Mother-love is an instinct, the same in the human being and the animal, and  often stronger in the latter. The continuance of this love in human beings is due to  association, to blood magnetism, and to psychic affinity. Families are sometimes  formed of those who have lived together before, but often not. The causes at work  are very complex and have to be balanced. Sometimes when a child with very bad  Karma is to be bom, parents of a callous type are chosen, or they may die before  the Karmic results appear. Or the suffering through the child may be their own Karma.  Mother-love, as an instinct, is between Rasātala and Talātala. 
Lipikas: 
The Lipikas keep man’s Karmic record, and impress it on the astral light. Vacillation: 
Vacillating people pass from one state of consciousness to another. Thought and Action: 
Thought arises before desire; the thought acts on the brain, the brain on the organ, and desire awakes. It is not the outer stimulus that arouses the organ. Thought therefore must be slain ere desire can be extinguished. The student must guard his thoughts; five minutes thought may undo the work of five years, and though the five year’s work w i l l be run through more rapidly the second time, yet time is lost.
62 
Meeting No. XIII: January 28,1891 
Present: A.B., C.W., I.C.-O., L.M.C., H.A.W.C., A.L.C., W.R.O.,  
C.F.W., G.R.S.M., E.K., E.T.S. 
Consciousness: 
H.P.B. began by challenging the views of consciousness held in the West,  commenting on the lack of definition in the leading philosophies. No distinction was made between consciousness and self-consciousness, and yet in this lay the difference between man and the animal. The animal was conscious only, not self- conscious; the animal does not know the Ego - as Subject - as does man. There is, therefore, an enormous difference between the consciousness of the bird, the insect, the beast,  
and that of man. 
Self-Consciousness: 
But the full consciousness of man is Self-Consciousness, that which makes us say “I do this or that”. If there is pleasure, it must be traced to someone experiencing it. Now the difference between the consciousness of man and of animals is, that while there is a self in the animal, the animal is not conscious of the self. Spencer27  reasons on consciousness, but when he comes to a gap, he merely jumps over it. So again Hume,28 when he says that on introspection he sees merely feelings and can never find any “I”, he forgets that without an “I” no perception of feelings would be possible; what is it that studies the feelings? The animal is not conscious of the feeling “I am I”; it has instinct, but instinct is not self- consciousness. Self consciousness is an attribute of the mind, not of the soul, the anima, whence the very name animal is taken. Humanity had no self-consciousness until the coming of the Mānasaputras in the third race. Consciousness, brain- consciousness, is the field of the light of the Ego, of the Auric Egg, of the Higher Manas. The cells of the legs are conscious, they cannot originate an idea, although when they are tired they can convey to the man an uneasy sensation, and so give rise to the idea of fatigue.  Instinct is the lower state of consciousness. Man has 
27 Herbert Spencer (1820-1903). 
28 David Hume ( 1 7 1 1 - 1776)
Meeting No. XIII: January 28,1891 63 
consciousness through the four lower keys of his septenary consciousness; there are  seven scales of consciousness in his consciousness, which is none the less essentially and pre-eminently one, a Unit. There are millions and millions of states of consciousness, as there are millions and millions of leaves; but as you cannot find two leaves alike, so you cannot find two states of consciousness alike; a state is  
never exactly repeated. 
Memory, etc, and Mind: 
Is memory a thing bom in us? that it can give birth to the Ego? Knowledge, feeling, and volition are colleagues of the mind, not faculties of it. Memory is an artificial thing, and adjunct of retentiveness; it can be sharpened or left dull, and it depends on the condition of the brain cells which store all impressions. Knowledge, feeling, volition, cannot be correlated, do what you will. They are not produced from each other, nor produced from mind, but are principles - colleagues. You cannot have knowledge without memory, for memory stores all things, garnishing and furnishing. If you teach a child nothing, it will know nothing. Brain consciousness depends on the intensity of the light shed by the higher Manas on the lower, and the extent of affinity between the brain and this light; it is the field of consciousness of the Manas. The animal has no Manas and the Monad latent, but its brain cannot respond; all potentialities are there, but are dormant. There are certain accepted errors in the West  which vitiate all their theories. 
Simultaneous impressions: 
How many impressions can a man receive simultaneously into his consciousness  and record? The Westerns say - one: occultists say, normally, seven, and abnormally, 14, 17, 19, 21, up to 49 impressions can be simultaneously received. You can prove it by striking at once the seven notes of the musical scale, the seven sounds reach the consciousness simultaneously, but the untrained ear can only recognize them after another, and if you choose you can measure the intervals. The trained ear will hear the seven notes at once, simultaneously. And experiment has shown that in two or three weeks a man may be trained to receive 17 or 18 impressions of colour, the  
interval decreasing with practise. 
Memory: 
Memory is acquired for this life, and can be expanded. Genius is the greatest  responsiveness of the brain, and brain-memory, to the Higher Manas. Impressions  on any sense are stored in the memory.
64  Mental and physical Sense: 
Before a physical sense is developed there is a mental feeling, which proceeds  to become a physical sense. Fishes which are blind, living in the deep sea, if they  are put into a pond will in a few generations, develop eyes. But in their previous  state there is a sense of seeing though no physical sight; how else should they, in  the darkness, find their prey, avoid dangers, etc. The mind will take in and store all  kinds of things mechanically and unconsciously, and will throw them into memory  as “unconscious perceptions”. If the attention is greatly engrossed in any way, the  sense-perception of any injury is not felt at the time; but later the suffering enters  into consciousness. So, returning to our example of the seven notes struck  simultaneously, we have one impression, but the ear is affected in succession by the  notes one after another, so that they are stored in the brain-mind in order, for the  untrained consciousness cannot register them simultaneously. All depends on training and on attention. Then the transference of a sensation passing from any organ to the consciousness is almost simultaneous, if your attention is fixed on it; but if any noise distracts your attention, then it will take a fraction more of a second before it reaches 
your consciousness. The occultist should train himself to receive and transmit, along  the line of the seven scales of his consciousness, every impression - or impressions - simultaneously. He who reduces the intervals of physical time the most has made the  most progress. 
Consciousness; Its seven scales: 
There are seven scales, or shades, of consciousness of the unit; e.g. in a moment  of pleasure or pain, four lower, three higher degrees. 
1. Physical sense-perception: (Perception of the cell; if paralyzed, the sense is  there, though “you” do not feel it.) 
2. Self-perception, or apperception: (i.e. self-perception of cell.) 
3. Psychic apperception: (of astral double, doppelgĀnger), which carries it  higher, to the - 
4. Vital perception: (physical feeling, sensation of pleasure and pain, - of  quality). (These arc the four lower scales, and belong to the Psycho-Physiological  man).
Meeting No. XIII: January 28, 1891 65 
5. Manasic discernment; of the lower Manas. (Manasic Self-perception.) 
6. Will-perception: (volitional perception, the voluntary taking in of an idea; e g. you can regard or disregard physical pain). 
7. Spiritual, entirely conscious, apperception: (because it reaches the higher Self conscious Manas). 
(Apperception means self-perception, conscious action; not, as with Leibnitz,29 but  when attention is fixed on the perception.) 
You can take these on any planes; e.g. bad news passes through the four lower  stages, coming to the heart. Or take sound: - 
1. It strikes the ear. 
2. Self-perception of the ear. 
3. On the psychic or mental, which carries it to 
4. Vital: (harsh, soft, strong, weak, etc.) 
The Ego: 
One of the best proofs that there is an Ego, a true field of consciousness, is the  fact already mentioned that a state of consciousness is never exactly reproduced, though you should live a hundred years, and pass through milliards and milliards. In an active day, how many states and sub-states there are; it would be impossible to have cells enough for all. This will help you understand why some mental states and abstract things follow the Ego in Devachan, and why others merely scatter into space. That which touches the Entity, has an affinity for it - as a noble action - is immortal, and goes with it into Devachan, forming part and parcel of the biography of the personality which is disintegrating. A lofty emotion runs through the 7 stages, and  
touches the Ego, the mind that plays its tunes in the mind-cells. 
Bhūrloka: 
The Bhūrloka begins with the lower Manas. Animals do not feel as do men; a  dog thinks more of his master being angry than he does of the actual pain of the  lash. The animal does not suffer in memory and in imagination, feeling past and  future, as well as actual present, pain. 
2 9 Gottfried Wilhelm von Leibnitz (1646-1716)
66  Pineal Gland: 
The special physical organ of perception is the brain, and perception is located  in the aura of the pineal gland. This aura answers in vibrations to any impressions;  but it can only be sensed, not perceived, in the living man. During the process of  thought manifestation to consciousness, a constant vibration occurs in the light of  the aura, and a clairvoyant looking at the brain of a living man may almost count,  see with the spiritual eye, the seven scales, the seven shades of light, passing from  the dullest to the brightest. You touch your hand; before you touch it the vibration  is already in the aura of the pineal gland, and has its own shade of colour. It is this  aura that causes the wear and tear of the organ by the vibration it sets up. The brain,  set vibrating, conveys the vibrations to the spinal cord, and so to the rest of the  body. Happiness as well as sorrow sets up these strong vibrations, and so wears out  the body. Powerful vibrations of joy or grief may thus kill. 
We can analyze the work of consciousness and describe it; but we cannot define  consciousness unless we postulate a subject. 
The Heart: 
The septenary disturbance and play of light around the pineal gland are reflected  in the heart, or rather the “area” of the heart, which vibrate and illumine the 7 brains of the heart; just as does the aura round the pineal gland. This is the - exoterically four, but esoterically - seven-leaved lotus, the saptapama, the cave of Buddha with its seven  compartments. 
Astral and Ego: 
There is a difference between the nature and the essence of the Astral Body and  the Ego. The Astral Body is molecular, however etherealized it may be; the Ego is  atomic, spiritual. The atoms are spiritual and forever invisible on this plane;  molecules form around them, they remaining as the higher invisible principles of the 
molecules. The eyes are the most occult of our senses; close them and you pass to  the mental plane. Stop all the senses, and you are entirely on another plane. 
Individuality: 
If twelve people are smoking together, the smoke of their cigarettes may mingle,  but the molecules of the smoke from each have an affinity with each other, and
Meeting No. XIII: January 28, 1891 67 
remain distinct for ever and ever, no matter how the whole mass may interblend.  So a drop of water though it fall into the ocean retains its individuality; it has become  a drop with a life of its own, like a man, and cannot be annihilated. 
A student asks whether the group - as a group - was a drop. H.P.B. answered in  the affirmative; if we had met to buy com, we should appear as a group in the Astral Light, buy30 we should not be permanent; but meeting to study occultism, we should cohere, and the impression would be more permanent. The higher and more spiritual  the affinity the more permanent the cohesion. 
A rose created by Kriyāśakti remains as a reflection. 
L[ower] Manas: 
The Lower Manas was an emanation from the Higher Manas, and was of the same essence as the higher. This nature (essence) can make no impression on this plane, nor receive any; an archangel, having no experience, would be senseless on ihis plane, would neither give nor receive impressions. So the Lower Manas clothes itself with the essence of the Astral Light; this astral envelope shuts it out from its parent, except through Antahkarana, which is the only salvation. Break this, and you become  an animal. 
Kāma: 
Kāma is life, it is the essence of the blood. When this leaves the blood, the latter  congeals. Prāna is universal on this plane; it is in us the vital principle, prānic rather  than Prāna. 
30 So in manuscript, all other sources have: but.

68 
Meeting No. XIV: February 4,1891 
Present: A.B., C.W., G.R.S.M., W.R.O., I.C.-O., L.M.C., A.L.C.  
C.F.W., E.T.S., H.A.W.C., E.K. 
“Self’ of Animals, etc.: 
Qualities determine the properties of “self-hood”. As, for instance, two wolves placed  in the same environment would probably act differently. 
Higher and Lower Manas; A.E. and Astral Light: 
The field of consciousness of the Higher Ego is never reflected in the Astral Light. The Auric Envelope receives the impressions of both the Higher and the Lower Manas, and it is the latter impressions which are also reflected in the Astral Light. Whereas the essence of all things spiritual, all that which reaches - or is not rejected by - the H. Ego is never reflected in the Astral Light, because the latter is on too low a plane. But during the life of a man this essence, with a view to Karmic ends, is impressed on the Auric Envelope, and, after death and the separation of the principles, is united with the Universal Mind (that is to say, those “impressions” which are superior to even the Devachanic plane), to wait there - karmically - until the day when the Ego is to be re-incamated. (There are these three sets of impressions which we may call the Karmic, Devachanic, and Mānasic.) For the entities, no matter how high, have to have their karmic rewards and punishments on earth. The spiritual impressions are more or less impressed upon the brain, otherwise the lower Ego would not be responsible. There are some impressions, however, received through the brain, which are not of our previous experience. In the case of the Adept, the brain is trained to  retain these impressions. 
Responsibility: 
The reincarnating “Ray” may, for convenience, be separated into two aspects, the lower Kāmic Ego is scattered in Kāma-loka, the Mānasic part accomplishes its cycle and returns to the Higher Ego. It is in reality this Higher Ego which is, so to say, punished, which suffers. This is the true Crucifixion of the Christos, the most

Meeting No. XIV: February 4, 1891 69 
abstruse but yet most important mystery of Occultism; all the cycle of our lives hangs on it. It is indeed the Higher Ego which is the sufferer; for, remember, the abstract consciousness of the higher personal consciousness will remain impressed on the  Ego, since it must be part and parcel of its Eternity. 
All our grandest inspirations are impressed on the Higher Ego because they are  of the same nature as itself. 
Patriotism, etc.: 
Patriotism, and great actions performed in the national service are not altogether  good, from the point of view of the Highest. To benefit a portion of Humanity is  good, but to do so at the expense of the rest is bad. Therefore in patriotism, etc. the  venom is also assimilated with the good. For though the inner essence of the Higher  Ego is unsoilable, the outer may be soiled. Thus both the good and the bad - of such  “immaterial” inspirations - are impressed on the A.E. and the Karma of the bad is  taken up by the H. Ego, though it is perfectly guiltless of it. Thus both sets of  impressions scatter, after death, in the Universal Mind; and on reincarnation the  Ego sends out a ray, which is itself into a new personality - and there suffers. It  suffers in the self-consciousness that it has created by its accumulated experience. 
Higher Ego: 
Every one of our Egos has the Karma of past Manvantaras behind. There are  seven Hierarchies of Egos, some of which - e.g. in inferior tribes - may be said to  be only just beginning this present Cycle. The Ego starts with Divine consciousness; no past, no future, no separation. It is long before realizing that it is itself, only after many births does it begin to discern, by this collectivity of experience, that it is individual. At the end of its cycle of incarnations, it is still the same divine consciousness, but it has now become individualized self- consciousness. Responsibility: 
The feeling of responsibility is inspired by the presence of the light of the H.  Ego. As the Ego in its cycle of rebirths becomes more and more individualized, it  learns more and more by suffering, to recognize its own responsibility, by which it finally regains self-consciousness, the consciousness of all the Egos of the whole  Universe. Absolute being, to have the sensation or idea of all this, must pass through all experience - individually, not universally - so that when it returns it should have the same omniscience as the Universal Mind - plus the memory of all that ii has  passed through.
70  Day “Be-with-us”: 
At the day “Be-with-us”, every Ego has to remember all the cycles of its past  incarnations, for Manvantaras. The Ego comes in contact with this Earth, all seven  principles become one, it sees all that it has done therein. It sees the stream of its  past incarnations by a certain divine light. It sees all humanity at once, but still there 
is ever - as it were - a stream which is always the “I”. We should therefore always  endeavour to accentuate our responsibility. 
Responsibility of the Higher Ego: 
The Higher Ego may be compared to a globe of pure divine light, a Unit from  a higher plane, on which there is no differentiation. Descending to a plane of  differentiation it emanates a ray, which can only manifest through the personality,  which is already differentiated. A portion of this Ray - the L. Manas - during life  may so crystallize itself, and become one with Kāma, that it will remain assimilated  with matter. That portion which retains its purity forms Antahkarana. 
Antahkarana: 
The whole fate of an incarnation depends on whether Antahkarana will be able  to restrain the Kāma-Manas or not. After death the higher light (Antahkarana) which bears the memory and impressions of all good and noble aspirations, assimilates itself with the Higher Ego, the bad is dissociated in space, and comes back as bad Karma awaiting the personality (K.H.) - (see Theosophist, vol. iii, “Satan and spiritual death”).31 
Responsibility: 
The feeling of responsibility is the beginning of Wisdom, a proof that Ahamkāra  is beginning to fade out; the beginning of losing the feeling of separateness. 
Kāma-Rūpa: 
The Kāma-Rūpa eventually breaks up and goes into animals. All red-blooded  animals came from man. The cold-blooded ones are from matter of the past. The  blood is Kāma-Rūpa. 
31 The Theosophist, v o l III. O c to be r 18 8 1 , p p 12 - 1 5 ; r e pr int o f the l a s t pa r t, pp 13 - 1 5 , in The Letters of H.P. Blavatsky to A.P. Sinnett, London 1925, pp. 369-375; reprint o f the w ho l e a r ti c l e in H.P. Blavatsky Collected Writings, v o l III, pp, 28 7 -3 0 0 ,
Meeting No. XIV: February 4, 1891 71 
White and Red Corpuscles: 
The white corpuscles are the scavengers, “Devourers”, they are oozed out of the Astral through the spleen, and are of the same essence as the Astral. They are the “sweat-born” of the Chhāyā. Kāma is everywhere in the body. The red cells are drops of electric fluid, the “perspiration” of all the organs oozed out from every cell. They  
are the progeny of the Fohatic principle. 
Heart: 
There are seven brains in the heart, the upādhis and symbols of the seven  Hierarchies. 
Fires: 
The Fires are always playing round the Pineal; but when KundalinT illuminates  them for a brief instant the whole Universe is seen. Even in deep sleep the third Eye  opens. This is good for Manas, who profits by it, though we ourselves do not  remember.
72 