
Meeting No. XV: February 11,1891 
Present: A.B., L.M.C., C.W., W.R.O., G.R.S.M., A.L.C., E.T.S.,  
C.F.W., H.A.W.C., I.C.-O. 
(Very little instruction was given on this  
occasion.) Perception: 
In answer to a question on the seven stages of perception given on a previous evening, H.P.B. said that thought should be centered on the highest, the seventh,  and then an attempt to transcend this will prove that it is impossible to go beyond  it on this plane. There is nothing in the brain to carry the thinker on, and if thought  is to rise yet further it must be thought without a brain. Let the eyes be closed, the  will set not to let the brain work, and then the point may be transcended and the  student will pass to the next plane. All the seven stages of perception come before  Antahkarana; if you can pass beyond them you are on the Mānasic plane. 
Try to imagine something which transcends your power of thought; say, the nature of the Dhyāni-Chohans. Then make the brain passive and pass beyond. You will see a white radiant light, like silver, but opalescent as mother-of-pearl; then waves of colour will pass over it, beginning in the tenderest violet, and through bronze shades of green to Indigo - with metallic lustre - and that colour will remain. If you see this  you are on another plane. You should pass through seven stages. 
When a colour comes, glance at it, and if it is not good reject it. Let your attention be arrested only in the green, indigo, and yellow; these are good colours. The eye being connected with the brain, the colour you see most easily will be the colour of the personality. If you see red, it is merely physiological, and is to be disregarded. Green-bronze is the L. Manas, yellow-bronze the Antahkarana, and indigo-bronze is Manas. These are to be observed, and when the yellow-bronze merges into the indigo,  you are on the Mānasic plane. 
Noumena: 
On the Miuiasic plane you see the noumena, the essence of phenomena. You do
Meeting No. XV: February 11,1891 73 
not see people, or other consciousnesses, but have enough to do to keep your own.  The trained seer can see noumena always. The Adept sees the noumena on this plane,  the reality of things, so cannot be deceived. 
On different planes: 
In meditation the beginner may waver backwards and forwards between two  planes. You hear the ticking of a clock on this plane, then on the astral - the soul  of the ticking; when clocks are stopped here, the ticking goes on on a higher plane,  in the astral, and then in the ether, until the last bit of the clock has gone. It is the  same as with a dead body, which sends out emanations until the last molecule is  disintegrated. 
Time: 
There is no time in meditation, because there is no succession of states of  consciousness on this plane. 
Violet: 
Violet is the colour of the astral. You begin with it, but should not stay in it; try  to pass on. When you see a sheet of violet, you are beginning unconsciously to form a Māyāvi-Rūpa. Fix your attention, and if you “go away”, keep your consciousness firmly to the Māyāvic body; do not lose sight of it, hold on “like grim death” (“or  you will not remember”).
74 
Letters after the Preceding Meeting 
[In The Canadian Theosophist, vol. 47, January-February 1967, pp. 122-3, gives  two H.P.B.-letters with the following remark: 
“The following were written on Madame Blavatsky's personal stationary. The  first takes up two whole quarto size sheets; the short note dated February 11, 1891,  is on an octavo sheet.” 
Enclosed in a letter to Mr. W. Emmett Small, dated February 21, 1988, Mr. Tony Maddock, from London, sent him a photocopy of the original of the longest letter.  It is from this photocopy that the text of this letter is printed.] 
Esoteric Section 
[SEAL] 
H.P. Blavatsky 
Esoteric order. 
In view of the untheosophical disturbances created on February 11th 1891, by  the reading of the Diaries, such meetings are, henceforth, strictly prohibited. 
[Signed] H.P. Blavatsky 
Feb. 11th 1891. 
[Seal] 
Telegraphic Address: 
“BLAVATSKY, LONDON” 
E.S. 
Theosophical Head Quarters,  19, Avenue Road, 
Regent’s Park, N. W.  
London February 1891 
For the Sec[retar]y, to read  
to the group. 
To the members of the I.G. of the E.S. 
The first and most vital condition for success of a group instructed in Occultism  is unbroken harmony: otherwise, the invisible Forces pent up within the circle, using the elementals created by hatred, jealousy and ill-feeling, would make of them allies and turn the results of the instruction into Black Magic, flic harmony
Letters after thePrecedingMeeting 75 
of the I.G. has been twice broken up in this manner,32 and from the same cause and  the teaching has necessarily been stopped - the many suffering innocently for the  fault of one. 
If the harmony be a third time broken, the teaching of the group - as a group - will cease and will not be resumed. Individual members, who are worthy, will be  taught, but all class teaching - where the haters and the hated are promiscuously  gathered - will be put an end to at once. I hear one student of the group accused the  others of seeking to estrange that member from me; of influencing and setting me  against that fellow student. This proves that the ideas and opinion of the latter about  me are very much mixed. One capable of being influenced by any of his students,  is unfit to be a teacher even of ordinary ethics, let alone the Occult and Theosophical 
Sciences; for, it shows him incapable of judging for himself. Occultism does not  permit personal preferences and is no respecter of personalities. 
Therefore, if the esoteric teaching is to be resumed at all, each member must promise to abstain from criticism or even finding fault with a brother or sister student, and of slandering any member or members to any person, whether resident in the house or outside it; and before the teaching is resumed the group must come to a clear understanding of this and give a verbal and solemn assurance to each other, in the presence of all, of their mutual good will. He or she who will lie at that moment will be held as having lied to the Masters33 face; more - to have lied to his Higher Self33 Absolute outer harmony must be preserved: what of ill feeling is in the heart of each member, will henceforth injure that member only: it will be his or her Karma, and he or she will derive no benefit from the teaching. Such are my sine  qua non conditions. 
[Signed] H.P. Blavatsky 
32 The first time was in September 1890. see note 15 on p. 26. 
33 The Cana dian Theosophist reads: 
“He or she who will lie al that moment will he held as having lied to the Master's face; more - to have lied to his Higher Self ” 
In the original text the words Masters (without apostrophe!) and Higher Self are underlined twice.
76 
Meeting No. XVI: March 11,1891 
Present: A.B., I.C.-O., L.M.C., C.W., W.R.O., G.R.S.M., A.L.C.,  
H.A.W.C., C.F.W. 
Consciousness: 
The consciousness which is merely the animal consciousness, is made up of the  consciousness of all the cells in the body, except those of the heart. The heart is the  king, the most important organ in the body of man. Even if the head be severed  from the body, the heart will continue to beat for thirty minutes. It will beat for  some hours if wrapped in cotton-wool and put in a warm place. The spot in the heart which is the last of all to die is the seat of life, the centre of all, Brahma. The first 
spot that lives, in the foetus, and the last that dies. When a Yogi is buried, in trance, it is this spot that lives, though the rest of the body be dead; and so long as this is alive, the YogT can be resurrected. This spot contains potentially mind, Life, energy, and will. During life it radiates prismatic colours, fiery and opalescent. The heart is the centre of spiritual consciousness, as the brain is the centre of intellectual. But this consciousness cannot be guided by a person, nor its energy directed by him, until he is at one with Buddhi-Manas; until then it guides him - if it can. Hence the pangs of  remorse, the prickings of conscience; they come from the heart, not the head. In the heart is the only manifested god, the other two are invisible, and it is this which  represents the triad, Ātma-Buddhi-Manas. 
In reply to a question, whether the consciousness might not be concentrated on  the heart, and so the promptings of the spirit caught, H.P.B. said that anyone who  could thus concentrate would be at one with Manas, would have united Kāma- Manas to the H. Manas. The H. Manas could not directly guide man, it could only act  through the L. Manas. 
Three Centres: 
There are three principal centres in man - Head, Heart, and Navel - any two of  which may be + (positive) or - (negative) to each other, according to the relative  predominance of the centre.
Meeting No. XVI: March 11, 1891 77 
Organs, Δ and □: 
The Heart represents the Higher Triad, the liver and spleen represent the  quaternary. The solar plexus is the brain of the stomach. 
Christos: 
H.P.B. was asked if the three centres above-named would represent the Christos,  crucified between two thieves. She said it might serve as an analogy, but these figures must not be overdriven. It must never be forgotten that the L. Manas is the same in its essence as the Higher, and may become one with it by rejecting Kāmic impulses. The crucifixion of the Christos represents the self-sacrifice of the H. Manas, the father, that sends his “only-begotten Son” into the world to take upon him our sins. The Christ myth came from the mysteries. So also did the life of Apollonius of Tyana; this was suppressed by the Church Fathers because of its striking similarity to the life of  
Christ. 
Head and Heart: 
The psycho-intellectual man is all in the Head, with its seven gateways; the  spiritual man is in the Heart. The convolutions of the brain are formed by thought. 
Seven centres in the Brain: 
The third ventricle is filled with light during life, and not with a liquid, as after  death. 
There are seven cavities in the Brain which are quite empty during life, and it  is in these that visions must be reflected if they are to remain in the memory. These  centres are, in occultism, called “the seven harmonies”, the scale of divine harmonies. They are filled with Ākāśa, each with its own colour, according to the state of consciousness in which you are. The sixth is the pineal gland, which is hollow and empty during life; the seventh is the whole; the fifth is the 3rd ventricle; the fourth the Pituitary Body. When Manas is united to Ātma-Buddhi, or when Ātma-Buddhi is centred in Manas, it acts in the three higher cavities.- radiating - sending forth a  halo of light, and this is visible in the case of a very holy person. 
Cerebellum, etc.: 
The Cerebellum is the centre, the storehouse, of all the forces; it is the Kāma of  the head. The Pineal Gland corresponds to the uterus, its peduncles to the Fallopian
78 
tubes; the Pituitary Body is only its servant, its torch-bearer, like the servants bearing lights that used to run before the carriage of a princess. Man is thus androgyne, so far as his head is concerned. Man contains in himself every element that is found in the Universe. There is nothing in the Macrocosm that is not in the Microcosm. The Pineal Gland, as said, is quite empty during life; the Pituitary contains various essences. The granules in the Pineal are precipitated after death within the cavity. 
The cerebellum furnishes the materials for ideation; the frontal lobes are the  finishers and polishers of the materials; but they cannot, of themselves, create.  Clairvoyant perception is the consciousness of touch; thus, reading letters at the pit  of the stomach, psychometrizing substances, etc. Every sense has its consciousness,  and you can have consciousness through every sense. That is, there is a plane of  consciousness for every sense. There may be consciousness on the plane of sight,  though the brain be paralyzed; the eyes of a paralyzed person will show terror. So  with the sense of hearing; those who are physically blind, deaf, or dumb, are still  possessed of the psychic counterparts of these senses. 
Will and Desire: 
Eros in man is the will of the genius to create great pictures, great music, things  that will live and will serve the race. It has nothing in common with the animal  desire to create. Will is of the H. Manas. Desire is the outcome of separateness, aiming at the satisfaction of self in matter. The path opened between the H. Ego and the  Lower enables the Ego to act on the personal self. 
“Conversion”: 
It is not true that a man powerful in evil can suddenly be “converted”, and  become as powerful for good. His vehicle is too defiled, and he can at best but  neutralize the evil, balancing up the bad Karmic causes he has set in motion, at any  rate for this incarnation. You cannot take a herring barrel and use it for attar of  roses, the wood is too soaked through with the drippings. When evil impulses and  tendencies have become impressed on the physical nature, they cannot at once be  reversed; the molecules of the body have been set in a Kāmic direction, and though  they have sufficient intelligence to discern between things on their own plane, i.e.  to avoid things harmful to themselves, they cannot understand a change of  direction, the impulse of which is from another plane. If they are forced too  violently, disease, madness, or death, will result.

Meeting No. XVI: March 11,1891 79 
Origins: 
Absolute, eternal motion - 
Parabrahman - which is noth 
ing and everything, motion  
inconceivably rapid, in this  
motion throws off a film,  
which is Energy, Eros. It  
transforms itself to Mūla 
prakrti, primordial substance,  
which is still energy. This  
energy, still transforming it 
self in its ceaseless and in 
conceivable motion, becomes  
the atom - or rather the germ  
of the atom - and then it is on  
the third plane. 
Our Manas is a ray from the World-Soul, and is withdrawn at Pralaya; “it is,  perhaps, the L. Manas of Parabrahman”, that is of the Parabrahman of the  manifested Universe. 
The first film is Energy, or motion on the manifested plane; Ālaya is the third  Logos, Mahā-Buddhi, Mahat. We always begin on the third plane, beyond that all  is inconceivable. 
Ātman is focused in Buddhi, but is embodied only in Manas, these being the Spirit,  Soul, and Body of the Universe.
80 
Meeting No. XVII: March 25,1891 
Present: C.F.W., L.[M.]C., I.C.-O., G.R.S.M., E.K.,  
W.R.O., H.A.W.C., A.B. 
Dreams: 
We have many evil experiences in dreams as well as good. We should therefore  train ourselves so as to awaken directly we tend to do wrong. The L. Manas is asleep in sense-dreams, the animal consciousness being then guided towards the Astral Light, by Kāma; the tendency of such sense-dreams is always towards the animal. If we could remember our dreams in deep sleep, then we should be able to remember all our past  incarnations. 
Nidanas: 
There are twelve Nidānas, exoteric and esoteric, the fundamental doctrine of  Buddhism. So also there are twelve exoteric Buddhist Suttas, called Nidānas, each  giving one Nidāna.34 The Nidānas have a dual meaning. They are:- 
(1) The twelve causes of sentient existence, through the twelve links of subjective  with objective nature. 
(2) A concatenation of causes and effects. Every cause produces an effect, and this  effect becomes in its turn a cause. Each of these has an Upādhi, one of the  subdivisions of one of the Nidānas, and also an effect or consequence. 
Both causes and effects belong to one or another Nidāna, each having from 3  to 17, 18, or 21 divisions. 
The names of the 12 Nidānas are:- 
34 The twelvefold division is well-known and one can find this division in every textbook of  Buddhism. The sentence between square brackets: (the Mahanidanasutta, in the first cd. on p. 104, is  an error.

Meeting No. XVII: March 25, 1891 81 1. Jarāmārana 7. Sparśa 
2. Jāti 8. Sadāyata 
na  
a 
3. Bhāva 9. Nāmarūp 4. Upādāna 10. Vijñāna 
5. Trsnā 11. Samskāra 
6. Vedanā 12. Avidyā 
1. Jaramarana: literally, death in consequence of decrepitude. Notice that death  and not life comes as the first Nidāna. This is the first fundamental in Buddhist  philosophy; every atom, at every moment, as soon as it is bom begins dying. 
The five Skandhas are founded on it, they are its effects or product. Moreover  in its turn it is based on the five Skandhas. They are mutual things, one gives to the  other. 
2. Jāti: literally, birth. That is to say, birth according to one of the four modes  of Caturyoni (the four wombs), viz.:- 
(a) Through the womb, like mammalia. 
(b) Through eggs. 
(c) Ethereal or liquid germs (e.g. fish-spawn, pollen, etc.). 
(d) Anupapādaka - Nirmanakāyas, gods, etc. 
That is to say, that birth takes place by one of these modes. You must be born in  one of the six objective modes of existence, or in the seventh, which is subjective. 
These four are within the six modes of existence, viz.:- 
1. Devas. 4. Men in hell. 
2. Men 5. Pretas, devouri 3. Asuras 6. Animals. 
Esoterically:- 
ng demons on earth 
1. Higher gods. 2. Devas (or Pitrs - all classes). 
3. Nirmanakāyas. 4. Bodhisattvas. 
5. Men in Myalba. 
6. Kāma-rūpic existences, whether of men or animals; in Kāma-loka, or the  Astral light. 
7. Elcmentals (subjective existences).
82 
3. Bhāva - Karmic existence, not life existence, but as a moral agent which  determines where you will be born, i.e. in which of the Triloka - Bhūr, Bhuvar, or  Svar - (7 lokas in reality). 
The Cause or Nidāna of Bhāva is Upādāna, that is, the clinging to existence; that  which makes us desire life in whatever form. The effect is Jāti, in one or other of  the Triloka, and under whatever conditions.
83 
Meeting No. XVIII: April 1, 1891 
Present: W.R.O., I.C.-O., E.T.S., C.F.W., H.A.W.C., L.M.C., C.W. 
Nidanas are the detailed expression of the law of Karma, under twelve aspects,  or, we might say - the law of Karma under twelve Nidānic aspects. 
Skandhas: 
Skandhas are the germs of life on all the seven planes of being, and make up the  totality of the subjective and objective man. Every vibration we have made is a  Skandha. The Skandhas are closely united to the pictures in the Astral Light, which  is the medium of impression; and the Skandhas - or vibrations - connected with  subjective and objective man, are the links which attract the reincarnating Ego; the  germs left behind when it went into Devachan, which have to be picked up again  and exhausted by a new personality. The exoteric skandhas have to do with the physical atoms and vibrations, or objective man; the esoteric with the internal or subjective  man. 
A mental change or a glimpse of spiritual truth, may make a man change to the  truth, even at his death, thus creating good Skandhas for the next life, but he would  still have to suffer for his misdeeds, and this is the basis of the ideas of “deathbed  repentance”. But the Karmic effects of the past life must follow, for the man in his  next birth must pick up the Skandhas, or vibratory impressions, that he left in the  Astral Light; since nothing comes from nothing, in Occultism, and there must be  a link between the lives. New Skandhas are bom from their old parents. 
It is wrong to speak of Tanhās in the plural, there is only one Tanhā - the desire  to live. This develops into a multitude, or, we might say, a congeries of ideas. The  Skandhas are Karmic and non-Karmic. Skandhas may produce elementals by  unconscious Kriyāśakti. Every elemental that is thrown out by man must return to  him, sooner or later, since it is his own vibration', they thus become his Frankenstein.35  Elementals are simply effects producing effects; they are 
35 The leading character in the book Frankenstein ( 1 8 1 8 ) by Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley
84 
disembodied thoughts, good and bad; they remain crystallized in the Astral Light,  and are attracted by affinity, and galvanized back into life again when their  originator returns to earth-life; you can paralyze them by reverse effects. Elementals  are caught like a disease, and hence are dangerous to ourselves and to others; this  is why it is dangerous to influence others. The elementals which live after your death 
are those which you implant in others; the rest remain latent till you reincarnate,  when they come to life again. 
Thus, H.P.B. said, if you are badly taught by me, or incited thereby to do  something wrong, you would go on after my death and sin through me, but I should  have to bear the Karma. Calvin,36 for instance, will have to suffer for all the wrong  teachings he has given, though he gave it with good intentions. The worst Booth37 
does is to arrest the progress of truth; even Buddha made mistakes; he applied his  teaching to people who were not ready, and this has produced Nidānas. 
Mayavi-Rupa: 
When a man visits another in his astral body, it is the Linga-Śarīra which goes,  but this cannot happen at any great distance. When a man thinks of another at a  distance very intently, he sometimes appears to that person. In this case it is the  Māyāvi-Rūpa which is created by unconscious Kriyāśakti; the man himself is not  conscious of appearing. If he were, and projected his Māyāvi-Rūpa consciously, he  would be an Adept. No two persons can be simultaneously conscious of another’s  presence unless one be an Adept. Dugpas use the Māyāvi-Rūpa, and sorcerers also. 
Dugpas work on the Linga-Śarīra of others. 
Linga-Śarīra: 
The Linga-Śarīra in the spleen is the perfect picture of the man, and is good or  bad according to his own nature. 
The Astral body is the subjective image of the man which is to be, the first germ  in the matrix, the model of the physical body, in which the child is formed and  developed. The Linga-Śarīra may be hurt by a sharp instrument, and would not face  a sword or bayonet, although it would easily pass through a table or other 
piece of furniture. 
36John (Jean) Calvin (1509-1564), French Church reformer and theologian. 
37 William Booth (1829-1912), founder and first Gencral of the Salvation Army.
Meeting No. XVIII: April 1, 1891 85 
Nothing, however, can hurt the Mayavi-Rupa, or Thought-body, since it is purely subjective. When a sword is used against the Linga-Sanra it is the sword itself, not the linga-śarlra of the sword, that cuts. Sharp instruments alone can penetrate Liriga-Śarīras, or Astrals, e.g. under water a blow will not affect you, but a cut will. 
The projection of the Astral body should not be attempted, but the power of  Kriyāśakti should be exercised in the projection of the Māyāvi-Rūpa. 
Fire: 
Fire is not an element, but a divine thing; the physical flame is the objective vehicle  of the highest spirit; the fire elemental are the highest. 
Everything in the world has its aura and its spirit; the flame you apply to the  candle has nothing to do with the candle itself. The aura of the object comes into  conjunction with the lowest part of ether. Granite cannot be burnt, because its aura  is fire. Fire elementals have no consciousness on this plane, they are too high,  reflecting the divinity of their own essence. Other elementals have consciousness on  this plane, as they reflect man and his nature. 
There is a great difference between the mineral and the vegetable kingdoms. 
The wick of the lamp, for instance, is negative, it is made positive by fire, the  oil being the medium. Ether is Fire; the lowest form of ether is the flame which you  see. Fire is divinity in its subjective presence throughout the Universe. Under other  conditions this Universal Fire manifests as water, air, and earth. It is the one element 
in our visible universe which is the Kriyāśakti of all forms of life. It is that which gives light, heat, death, life, etc. It is even the blood. In all its various manifestations it is essentially one. It is the “seven Cosmocratores”. Evidences of the esteem in which fire was held (by the ancients) are to be found in the Old Testament; the pillar  
of fire, the burning bush, the shining face of Moses38 - all Fire. 
Fire is like a looking-glass in its nature, and reflects the beams of the first order  of Subjective Manifestations. The subjective manifestations which are supposed to  be thrown on the screen of the first outlines of the created Universe, in their lower  aspect, are the creations of lire. 
38 Ex 13, 21-22 and 14, 24 (pillar of lire); Ex. 3,, 2-4 (burning bush); Ex. 34, 29-35 (shining face)
86 
Fire is the grossest aspect of its essence, is the first form, and reflects the lower  forms of the first Subjective Beings which are in the Universe. The first divine chaotic thoughts are the fire elementals. When on earth they take a form and come flitting in the flame, in the form of the Salamanders or fire elementals. In the air you have millions of living and conscious beings, besides our thoughts, which they catch up. 
The fire elementals are related to the sense of sight, and absorb the elementals  of all the other senses. Thus through sight you can have the consciousness of feeling,  hearing, tasting, etc. since all are included in the sense of sight. 
As time goes on there will be more and more Ether in the air. When Aether fills  the air, then will be bom children without fathers. 
In Virginia there is an apple tree of a special kind; it does not bloom, but bears  fruit from a kind of berry, without any seeds. This will gradually extend to animals,  and then to men. Women will bear children without impregnation, and in the seventh  Round there will appear men who can reproduce themselves. 
In the seventh Race of this 4th Round men will change their skins every year,  and will have new toe and finger nails. People will become more psychic, then spiritual.  Last of all in the seventh Round Buddhas will be bom, without sin. 
The Fourth Round is the longest in the Kali Yuga, then the Fifth, then the Sixth,  and the Seventh will be very short.
87 
Meeting No. XIX: April 15,1891 
Present: W.R.O., H.A.W.C., L.M.C., I.C.-O., C.W., E.T.S., C.F.W., G.R.S.M. On the Higher and Lower Ego, Devachan, and the “Death of the Soul”. 
In explaining this the following figure was drawn:- 

On the separation of the principles at death, the H. Ego may be said to go to  Devachan by reason of the experiences of the Lower. 
The H. Ego on its own plane is the Kumāra. The Lower quaternary dissolves:- the body rots, the L. Śarīra fades out. 
At incarnation the H. Ego shoots out a ray, the L. Ego. Its energies are upwards  and downwards; the upward tendencies become its Devachanic experiences, the lower  are Kāmic. The H. Manas stands to Buddhi as the L. Manas to the Higher. 
As to the question of responsibility, it may be understood by an example. If you  take the form of “Jack the Ripper” you must suffer for its misdeeds, for the law will  punish the murderer and hold him responsible. In the same way the H. Ego is the  Christos, the Sacrificial Victim for the L. Manas. The Ego takes the responsibility  for every body it informs. 
You borrow some money and lend it to another; the other runs away - but it is  von who are responsible. 
The mission of the H. Ego is to shoot out a Kay to be a soul in a child.

88 
Thus the Ego incarnates in a thousand bodies, taking upon itself the sins and  responsibilities of each body. Every incarnation a new ray is emitted, and yet it is  the same ray in essence, the same in you and me and everyone. The dross of the  incarnation disintegrates, the good goes to Devachan. 
The Flame is eternal. From the Flame of the H. Ego the Lower is lighted, and  from this a lower vehicle, and so on. 
And yet the L. Manas is such as it makes itself. It is possible for it to act differently in like conditions, for it has reason and self-conscious knowledge of right and wrong, and good and evil, given to it. It is in fact endowed with all the attributes of the Divine Soul. In this the Ray is the Higher Manas, the speck of responsibility on earth. 
The part of the essence is the essence, but while it is out of itself, so to say, it  can get soiled and polluted. 
The Ray can be manifested on this earth because it can send forth its Māyāvi Rūpa. But the Higher cannot, and so it has to send forth a Ray. We may look upon  the H. Ego as the sun and the personal Manases as its Rays. If we take away the  surrounding air and light, the ray may be said to return to the sun, so with the L.  Manas and the L. Quaternary. 
In cases of soul death, the L. Manas no more disappears than does the Kāma Rūpa, after death. After the severance the ray may be said to snap or be dropped.  After death such a man cannot go to Devachan, nor yet remain in Kāma-loka; his  fate is to be reincarnated immediately. Such an entity is then an animal soul, plus  the intelligence of the severed ray. The manifestation of this intelligence in the next  birth will depend entirely on the physical formation of the brain, and on education.  Such a soul may again be reunited with its H. Ego in the next birth, if its  environment is such as to give it a chance of aspiration (this is the “grace” of the  Christians); or it may go on for two or three incarnations, the ray becoming weaker  and weaker and gradually dissipating, until it is bom a congenital idiot, and then  finally dissipates in lower forms. 
There are enormous mysteries connected with the Lower Manas.

Meeting No. XIX: April 15, 1891 89 
With regard to such intellectual giants as Huxley,39 Tyndall,40 etc., they are in  somewhat the same condition as soulless men, for their H. Ego is paralyzed, that  is to say, their spiritual nature is atrophied. 
The Manas can pass its essence to several vehicles, e.g. the Māyāvi-Rūpa, Kāma Rūpa, etc., and even to the elementals, which it can ensoul, as the Rosicrucians taught  (See “Count de Gabalis”41). 
Mayavi-Rupa: 
The Mayavi-Rupa may be sometimes so vitalized that it goes on to another plane,  and unites with the beings of that plane, and so ensouls them. 
People who bestow great affection on animal pets are ensouling them to a certain extent, and such animal souls progress very rapidly; in return such persons get back the animal vitality and magnetism. It is, however, against nature to accentuate animal  evolution, and the whole is bad. 
Monadic Evolution: 
The Kumāras do not direct the evolution of the Lunar Pitrs. To understand the  latter, we might take the analogy of the blood. 
The blood may be compared to the universal life principle:- the Corpuscles to  the Monads. The different kinds of corpuscles are the same as the various classes  of Monads, and various kingdoms; not, however, because of their essence being  different, but because of the environment in which they are. 
The Chhāyā is the permanent seed, and Weismann42 in his hereditary germ theory  is very near the truth. 
H.P.B. was asked whether there was one Ego to one permanent Chhāyā seed, 
39 Thomas Henry Huxley (1825-1895), biologist and philosopher, grandfather of Julian and Aldous. 40 John Tyndall (1820-1893), physicist. 
41 Le Comte de Gabalis. written by Abbe Nicolas Pierre Henry de Montfaucon de Villars, Paris 1670;  the passage is in the English translation, London 1742, on p 26 and in the translation of London 1914,  on p, 32. 
4 2August W eism ann ( 1834- 1914), zoologis t.

90 
oversouling it in a series of incarnations:- her answer was:- “No, it is Heaven and  Earth kissing each other.” 
The animal souls are in temporary forms and shells in which they  gain experience, and in which they prepare materials for higher  
evolution. 
Until the age of seven, the astral atavi[sti]c germ forms and moulds the  body; after that the body forms the astral. 
The Astral and the mind naturally react on each other. 
ScaleofEmanations 
X 
Parabrahman  
Mūlaprakrti  
Manvantaric Aspect 

Attributes, 
Māyāvi-Rūpa, etc. 
N.B. The number of rays in the above diagram is quite arbitrary.
9 1 
Meeting No. XX: April 22, 1891 
Present: W.R.O., C.W., E.T.S., C.F.W., I.C.-O., E.K., H.A.W.C.,  
G.R.S.M., L.M.C. 
Astral Body: 
The meaning of the passage in the Upanisads where it says that the Gods feed  on men,43 is, that the H. Ego obtains its earth experience through the Lower. 
The Astral can get out unconsciously to the person, and wander about. The Chhāyā is the same as the Astral Body; the germ, or life essence of it is in the spleen. “The Chhāyā is curled up in the spleen.” It is from this that the Astral is formed; it evolves in a shadowy, curling, or gyrating, essence - like smoke; gradually taking form as it grows. But it is not projected from the physical, atom for atom. This latter intermolecular form is the Kāma-Rūpa. At death every cell and molecule gives out its essence, and from it is formed the Astral of the Kāma-Rūpa; but this can  never come out during life. 
The Chhāyā, in order to become visible, draws upon the surrounding  atmosphere, attracting the atoms to itself; the Linga-Śarīra could not form in vacuo.  The fact of the Astral body accounts for the Arabian and Eastern tales of Djinns and bottle imps, etc. 
The spiritualistic phenomena, the resemblance to deceased persons is most  (often) caused by the imagination. The clothing on such phantoms is formed from  the living atoms of the medium, and is no real clothing, and has nothing to do with  the clothing of the medium. “All the clothing of a materialization has been paid for.” 
The Astral supports life; it is the reservoir or sponge of life, gathering it up from all the natural kingdoms around, and is the intermediary between the kingdoms of Prānic and physical life. Life cannot come immediately from the subjective to the  objective, for Nature goes gradually through each sphere. 
Therefore the Linga-Śarīra is the intermediary between Prāna and our physical  body, and pumps in the life. The spleen is, consequently, a very delicate organ, but 
43 Bhagavad-Gita, XI, 25-28 (the B.G. is also an Upanisad),

92 The Inner Group Teachfngs of h.P. blavatsky the physical spleen is only a cover for the real spleen. 
Now life is in reality Divinity, Parabrahman. But in order to manifest on the physical plane it must be assimilated; and as the purely physical is too gross, it must have a  medium, viz., the Astral. 
Astral matter is not homogeneous and the Astral Light is nothing but the shadow  of the real divine light; it is, however, not molecular. 
These Kāma-Rūpic entities which are below the Devachanic plane are in Kāma Loka, and only possess intelligence like monkeys. There are no entities in the four  lower Kingdoms possessing intelligence and which can communicate with men, but  the elementals have instincts like animals. It is, however, possible for the Sylphs,  the air elementals - the wickedest things in the world - to communicate; but they  require to be propitiated. Spooks, Kāma-Rūpic entities, can only give the information they see immediately before them. They see things in the aura of people, although  the people may not be aware of them themselves. 
Earthbound spirits are Kāma-lokic entities that have been so materialistic that  they cannot be dissolved for a long time. They have only a glimmering of consciousness, and do not know why they are held. Some sleep, some preserve a glimmering of consciousness and suffer tortures. In the case of those who have very little Devachan the greater part of the consciousness remains in Kāma-loka, and may last far beyond the normal period of 150 years, and remain over until the next incarnation of the spirit. This then becomes the “Dweller on the Threshold”, and fights with the new Astral. 
The acme of Kāma is the sexual instinct, e.g. idiots have such desires, and also  food appetites, etc., and nothing else. 
Devachan is a state on a plane of spiritual consciousness; Kāma-loka is on a plane of physical consciousness. It is the shadow of the animal world and that of  instinctive feelings. When the consciousness thinks of spiritual things it is on a spiritual plane. If one’s thoughts are of nature, flowers, etc., then the consciousness is on the  material plane. 
But if the thoughts are about eating, drinking, etc., the passions, then the  consciousness is on the Kāma-lokic plane, which is the plane of animal instincts pure  and simple. 
The last teaching the I.G. received from the living lips of H.P.B.
