INTRODUCTION 
The present writers are bound to disclaim all pretence of having delineated more than the broad features of the subjects treated of in these pages. They are aware, however,that the world, at this late day, expects so little truth about the origin and infancy of man that it extends but a grudging consideration to anything beyond the vaguest surmises and the most shadowy outlines; and is always ready to condemn, what it would call, the credulous temerity of an individual, who ventures accurately to survey regions of investigation which it pronounces inexplorable 
The small band of esoteric teachers, the inheritors of the secret knowledge of the ages, have till lately found silence to be the only means for its preservation. But the time has arrived for the world to receive a portion of their accumulated wealth. The choice, however, of the present method, so different from all preconceived ideas of the fitness of things, is sure to give rise to feelings of a very varied character. The question would naturally suggest itself why the discovery of ancient books and manuscripts, undeniably authentic and plainly historical, should not have been made the occasion for the revival of the forgotten lore, if the present generation is to be at all instructed in the story of the origin and infancy of its ancestors. The allegorical character, however,of ancient writings which renders them unintelligible to all but the initiated reader, prevents such a course being adopted: hence the necessity of the present plan. 
It is herein attempted to show mankind of today what man was ages before those usually reckoned as the era of his first appearance on earth; and the early conditions of the race and its progressive growth will be found to teem with interest and instruction even in the meager account that follows. 
It will, perhaps, be asked - What is the source of information, who are the Teachers? They are the sages of the East, the inheritors of the knowledge of the Magian, the Chaldean, the Egyptian, and the ancient Rishis of India; from one of whom, a beloved and revered Master, known to many in the West as well as in the East, the present writers have received the instruction, part of which is presented to the world in the following pages. With the accuracy of the information here afforded, if not with its fulness, the writers are satisfied, and they give it with the sincere hope that the world, for its own enlightenment, will extent to it an open-minded and wise consideration,notwithstanding the imperfections which the shortcomings of the writers may have produced. 
The writers were perfect strangers to each other until they met last spring,and the circumstances which brought them together will be found narrated in the following prefaces. The mystical student of psychology, who knows the inadequacy of a bare statement of facts for the presentation of psychic incidents,will hardly need an apology for the form in which the narratives are cast. 

 
PREFACE 
BY THE EASTERN CHELA 
The sun had sunk down behind the tall pines, the giant sentries guarding the little cottage that so snugly nestled on the bosom of the Himalayas; but the evening glow, the farewell blessing of the departing luminary, still lingered on the treetops. The little shepherd boy, who so faithfully preserves the secrecy of the lonely habitation from the cruel ears of he hunters whose midnight halloos frighten the yearling fawns and whose murderous weapons ever and again render them motherless, had just brought in tidings that a company of English officials were encamped at no great distance and might be expected next morning, to outrage once more the peaceful hillside with their unhallowed sport. As the slight figure of the adventurous youth, descending the perilous crag with the sure step of the Himalayan goat, the companion of his infancy, was hidden from view by the deepening shadows of night, and the last note of his rude pipe died away in the stillness of the scene, a weariness came over the meditative mystic student, the solitary dweller of that lonely cottage. 
He was not born to mysticism, but was drawn into it. His eyes first beheld the light among the bustle and stir of a populous city; his youthful steps had threaded crowded thoroughfares and his mind was instructed in many an old seat of learning. Time had left on him footprints which had burnt deep into his soul. But inquire not into the origin of the students of The Holy Lore, and let not the curious hand rake up the cold ashes from the funeral pyre of the past. It is enough to say that the slow dissolution of selfishness had pushed the mystic back, step by step, from the busy walks of daily life, the ever expanding circle of duty had caused the early bonds to burst and the narrow heart to break and scatter its fragments far and wide. Sustained by the traditions of his race and cheered by the sad benevolent smile of one, not to be profaned by mention here, the mystic student treads the uphill path of duty to his country and his kind, though not without occasional checks from despondency and sorrow, produced by spectacles of sin and pain. The increasing serenity of his life deepened the pity in his soul for others whose course diverged from his. O that man should be unhappy though his spirit is the very essence of bliss! But the Eternal Necessity works on its never-ending woof of progress through discord and imperfection. 
Roll on darks cycles of descent; our hands, though armed with the energy of self-sacrifice, clutch at the spokes of thy wheel in vain! To the last turn will that wheel revolve. We have only the privilege of pursuing our work in silent expectation of the day when thy resistless course will backward wind, but even now we have the glory of an unselfish death. O death, thou deep-veiled virgin, how few have seen the charms in thy face! How few are the worshippers on whom thy dark eyes have smiled! 
Ah, sweet is life,but sweeter still is death! 
How few comprehend death! None among that light-hearted and light-minded band of Englishmen whose campfires gleam in the darkness of the valley, like the lurid eyes of some cruel monster, knows the solemn majesty of death,whom they would as laughingly receive themselves as force upon others. 
The mystery of death is the greatest mystery of all. 

 
The past-searching eyes of yon Brahman, emerging from the Ganges' sacred waters, turn in mute appeal to the Gods of his fathers, at the sight of those ruined temples, raised by the pious hands of antiquity, and unbidden tears trickle down his cheeks as he mourns his country dead. Timid short-sighted man! Is India 
dead because she suckles children not her own? If thou could's place thyself on the crest of that proud mountain-wave thou wouldst see across the tracts of time the break of a dawn brighter and purer than these hills have yet beheld. Man! man is thy brother! Give to thy brother what he has not, and supply thy own deficiencies from what he offers thee. The right hand must aid the left, the East must united with the West; the young must join hands with the old; and the beauty of harmony will smile on the face of the Earth ..... 
Hark! what discordant scream disturbs the calm repose of the restful landscape? Sailing like a mass of darkness in the serene sea of moonlight, the Himalayan eagle startles the tremulous shades of night and wakens echoes from every glen and crag. But more piercing by far is the cry of despair borne by the western breeze from the unfortunate victims, naked and famishing among the crumbling ruins of Creed and Thought. The streams of sound swept by confused and indistinct; but the cries of the soul always wing their way to other souls, whose doors are not barred nor their casements closed. Loud above the rest was heard the clear voice of great hearts that knocks at the gates of self-crowned princes of thought, in vain attempt to raise an echo, and are thrown back upon the black rock of despair to wait for the ravenous jaws of the dragon of spiritual death. 
Amidst the psychic war of elements and the devouring earthquake of the mind, like a streak of silver light there flashed in the student's mind the voice of his master:- 
"Go, be true to thy pledge to manhood; westward lies thy path. Take this mutilated scroll, an unknown, though kindred spirit will bring the missing fragments, and then will be revealed to thee things which thou hast till now sought in vain. Take no thought for the morrow nor tarry here in a single day; thy path of duty leads to the West".... 
Far, far away in the New World, in the city of the rising sun there waited a solitary soul which seemed to have dropped from some other sphere and lost its way in a strange land. Its cry of help was heard and the words wrung form it by doubt and bewilderment were sped across long stretches of sea and land. 
The vision was downed in the tide of returning sense, but the ear caught the fading words, "Thy path of duty leads to the West." 
Obedient steps were bent westward and the faithful pupil found himself among the ill-fated splendour of Paris - Ah! Paris, Paris! thou must die that France may live! - France alone among her many enemies, and the worst of them thou! 
Ghostlike the ascetic haunted the homes of wealth and pleasure, everywhere regarded more as the mysterious hand that recorded the doom of the Assyrian monarch than a human being willing to work and bear. 

 
One evening among the gaieties of a Parisian salon, with all to charm the sense and sicken the soul, an airy tongue sellable his name: - 
"Come, come to my help!" 
The faraway voice downed the music and obscured the dancing shapes. The bright sallies of wit remained unheard, the gay companions unheeded. The two strangers met and were strangers no more, the fragments united together, the torn scroll became whole. 
The mystic scroll was all in quaint characters and in an unknown tongue. Many an anxious day and many a watchful night has it cost the fellow-students, united in a strange land, to decipher its meaning. The following pages represent the result  

 
PREFACE 
BY THE WESTERN CHELA 
The winds of a cheerless winter day had whirled and twirled snow-wreaths through the air until the world seemed wrapped in fleecy clouds. 
The space above and below man's feet was all white, all glistening with crystal flakes that multiplied themselves in endless forms and nestled on the earth like a gossamer pall. It was winter, and winter in a climate inhospitable and bitter even in its best aspects; winter in the north, where the bleak blasts were far too many and the warmth of summer tarried not long. This day there seemed to have been united the disagreeableness of many snowstorms, and the leaden look of the early dawn had justified the predictions of the weather-wise that there was likelihood of a strong blow from the polar regions. It came duly, and thick and fast, the pretty down kissed the cold earth and sank out of sight in its absorbing embrace. At first this was the case, but by-and-by the old mother weary of a repetition of such visits, returned them no more, and the little messengers gathered together on her breast, closely packing themselves, until she was entirely hidden from view and there was no more of her brown self visible to man, The world was decked in snow and he sky seemed never to weary of sifting it through space, and covering with its purity all the dark spots and uncanny lines of the city streets and byways. 
It was a day for meditation and dreams, a time for the restful to rest, the serene to find repose in their inner selves, safe from the interruptions of daily life without. For the contented, it was a day of peace and communion with better thoughts than could be invoked when the cares and the duties of the world interposed. 
And it was the opportunity for the soul to assert itself, and speak in no uncertain tones through the thick walls of sense which entirely deadened its voice many days at a time. 
In that vas city which the snow had claimed for its own, there was one soul which looked out through her slight casement upon the scenes of life, and rejoiced in the outward storm that gave such a prospect of inner calm. The tenement which enshrined that soul was slight indeed, and it trembled before the strength of the wind - as evidenced by the noise at the windows and about the entries. Gazing wistfully out upon the scene until giddiness caused the eyes to close and the heart to sigh in regret, thoughts of the hungry poor who were crowded in unwholesome habitations, of little children whose tender flesh was pinched and quivering, whose woes would be intensified by the presence of the visitant so beautiful to look upon, so hard to entertain unless greeted with warmth and cheer at the hearthstone,crowded the busy brain and caused the clasped hands to tighten in pain. Regrets which, worse than vain, are always weakening and distressing were not long harboured, for there was work for fingers and mind, and there were tasks unperformed awaiting attention. But whether it was the effects of the storm upon a highly strung nature or the sense of the helplessness that followed a realization of human suffering which could not be averted, the hands could not write, the brain refused to act and the passive mind lapsed into a reverie which seemed likely to deepen into slumber. It might have been a midday sleep, but it was not destined so to be. While yet the drooping eyelids hovered near together and the parted lips offered no impediment to the deep respiration of the half-reclining form, a mysterious something roused the dormant senses, and, as would a stroke of lightning, changed the recumbent position to one of upright, eager 

 
expectancy. 
There was another presence in the room; of this there could be no doubt; but whose? and from whence had it come? and how? The closed door had not been moved, and there was no sound through all the chambers and halls, echoing the tread of feet or reverberating to the tones of human voice. Profound was the stillness, save for the soft "tick, tick" of snowflakes upon the windowpanes, and the shrill whistle of an occasion gust which swept itself through inviting crevices, or expended its force in a sudden dash around the corners of the streets. Within, the stillness, deep and almost mystic, was suddenly startled by the broken exclamation of the dreamer, thus strangely greeted with a vision so vivid to sense, but so dim to comprehension. 
What a picture has presented itself! There stands in the space but a moment before vacant, the form of an eastern sage - graceful in bearing, benevolent of countenance, and earnest in the look he bends upon the wondering face before him. In one hand he carries a book-like parchment, and over his arm is thrown the white robe that falls on the opposite side almost if not quite to the floor. Long flowing hair mantles his shoulders, and on his feet are the sandals of the East. Perhaps it is the small staff of some brown wood he carries which emits so delicious and pungent an odour, for all the atmosphere is filled with fragrance and the senses are gratefully soothed. 
Standing quite unconscious of having done aught to surprise any one, and gently speaking to his listener, he is the most delightful picture of repose one could well imagine. The yellow Tibetan bodice worn under his long drapery, shines through the fold above it, and the Himalayan fur that circles its edge glints with light as he slightly moves his position in the gentle excitement of speech. His manner, at once so dignified and polished, reassures his listener, who now thoroughly alive to the strangeness of the presence, is wholly at ease, and so astonished at the words falling from his lips that attention is held fixed lest one should be unheeded. The voice, so soft and low, was heard for the first time. There was about it a musical cadence which echoed the words as they came from his lips; it was as though they were spoken from afar and were repeated through space. 
"Strange phantom, freak of fancy perhaps", was the thought he saw photographed on the brain of his listener, and instantly he pointed to the wall above him, when there appeared sentence in quaint script, which translated,reads thus: - "There is no charity in the West for the unknown doctrine". 
"What is the unknown doctrines?" quickly queried the comprehending mind. 
The stranger smiling, answered, "It is the essence of all doctrines,the inner truth of all religions- creed less, nameless, untaught by priests, because it is of the spirit and not to be found in temple or synagogue. It is the still small voice heard in the whirlwind and felt in the storm. You involuntarily appealed to me, something stronger than yourself, to care for the helpless and house the homeless. Your heart breathed its prayer; your soul registered it in the atmosphere about you; and the spirit was refreshed by so pure a breath wafted from the lower kingdom to the higher; from the body to the soul and thence to the region of spirits". 

 
And continuing, he taught the mystery of man's being, his origin, his growth, his destiny, in the words of these pages. The teacher came again and often, and instructed the willing pupil from the writings of the ancient volume guarded so tenderly. He taught the laws of life in language so wise that the conviction of 
the highest truth filtered through the reverent mind so singularly chosen for instruction. The lessons were given from evening to evening with unchanging patience on the part of the strange preceptor; and with gentle suasion he instilled and developed the intuition to grasp the higher knowledge offered for acceptance. With varying success his work was accomplished. Weeks passed away while the mysterious master returned whenever opportunity offered, and explained things wise and deep, whereof the pupil hardly comprehended the sense. The routine matters of the day which absorb the best part of nearly every life, many times obtruded themselves, and there were delays and interruptions which sadly interfered with the weird instruction. 
One day there was an end to all this. The master came no more. The doubt and misgivings, the unrest and illusions of the worldly mind, defeated his best endeavours, and he saw the futility of trying to train in wisdom nature divided against itself at every point. 
But he did not forsake his charge; he sent a messenger,a youth from his own hand, who taught the mystic lore with careful purpose and kind intent, but the duty, it was easy to see, was not to him what it had been to his master. 
The realization of this fact was often borne in upon the mind of the learner, and one day as if in answer to the thought, he directed attention to the opposite wall where, as by magic, there appeared upon the white surface in shining letters this aphorism:- 
"The test of true apprenticeship is fidelity to another's interest". 
Unselfish obedience to his master's wishes, in other words, was the way to growth and development for him, and thus the riddle of his presence against his personal wishes was solved. He smilingly admitted the correctness of this conclusion and when he had gained the further confidence of his charge,the youth solved many riddles, the elucidation of which imperceptibly lifted the soul of the instructed one and planted aspirations which were high and good.  
A day came when his visits ceased, and nothing was left to compensate for the disappointment, save an assurance that, in a foreign land and distant, the master awaited his pupil's coming, and that there the lessons would be resumed and the writings completed. 
Should a spectre be obeyed? 
To tread the path the airy fingers pointed, was to dissolve ties not lightly to be severed, to ignore worldly considerations deemed of the utmost moment, and to surrender self-will to an extent which no one could understand without a betrayal of the whole matter. And what the world would say to such an avowal the pupil knew too well. True, that the powers, goodness, wisdom and sincerity of the Magi of the East and their messenger, were felt to the innermost fibres of the pupil's being; true, that all grateful was that heart, 

 
and earnest the mind; true, whatever else was false, that more beautiful and ennobling sentiments had never been enjoyed than those given by these mystic teachers. 
Strange that hesitation, and fear, and moral cowardice should shadow a life so singularly brightened and developed! Strange, that so cruel a poison as doubt, should rankle in the soul of the neophyte. 
Alas! how many trusting souls have been wrecked by the same sin. How many fair hopes and golden dreams have been engulfed in the black night it creates. What a desert waste of sunny heart-climes! What death in life; what disappointment and despair it is able to produce! 
At first it came as an occasional mystery obtruding its stifling presence when other things engrossed the busy mind; and its existence was barely recognized, and then ignored. Repeatedly it returned until it came to be looked upon as an undesirable guest whose visit was ill-timed and unwarranted, but whose legitimate claims upon hospitality had been established on many another occasion. The guest who has once been cordially invited is ever a possible blessing or a threatening menace; a comer who is sure nevertheless, and who must be received however welcome's warmth has abated. 
Doubt, cruel and cold, held court in the neophyte's castle, and only loyalty to the past was strong enough to resist its insidious advances and scorn implied insinuations. 
Did the heart bleed? the pain of the wound was great; but greater far was the sense of unworthiness that succeeded any recollection of teacher or teachings; of glorious possibilities now blighted. For ever? So far as human judgment could decide - yes ; so far as the clear sense of intuition could feel - no, a thousand times no! 
But the ebb-tide of hope was setting in, the nightshade of despair stayed all day with the once enthusiastic pupil. The world and its absorptions lost much of their importance in eyes weary with unshed tears, and dulled by the intensity of suppressed emotions. And who could give comfort in such a crisis? Only he who had taken away with his presence that follow peace of mind which the world gives and which the world not often values highly. The struggle, silent at first, waxed bitter, and intenser grew the sense of loss of the calm-hour visitors, who had so entirely and so inexplicably abandoned the lonely worker. 
The aching heart bowed itself prostrate before the storm within; the physical strength sank; the well springs of energy and endeavour seemed sapped at their fountain head; and beside its own dead-sea fruit, new doubts tortured the soul, sorrowing for sustenance, faint with hunger and famished for water. Memory-loosing soul! Why has the promise of the sage been forgotten? Why in all this battle with self has the master's instruction been ignored? In a foreign clime you may find him who you have lost and rejoice again in the presence of those who have been sent by him. "Courage", whispered the heart, and whispering, wakened the fast dying aspirations of the spirit. But doubt was a guest in that mental mansion, and with the freedom of an old and familiar visitor it came at will and stayed uninterruptedly. 

 
Winter passed, and Springtime came to gladden the earth with reminders of summer. The flowers struggle through the still, cold earth and the early birds sang hurried notes in the chilled morning air. The voice of rivulets was heard in their lonely beds and the faint notes of young lambs came from the covered folds on the hillsides. It was spring in the country and spring in the city; spring where the little schoolchildren sought the wood violets in sunny roadside nooks; and spring where the few trees, permitted to give sign of its presence, were decked with verdure. 
In the city it is the saddest time of all the twelvemonth, for it is spring, and yet spring is not there in all its beauty and varied associations, in its vivifying life-giving attributes, or pleasing anticipations. 
It was spring in young hearts and spring in hopeful ones; inspiring spring, full of promise and expectancy of joy un-enjoyed, and pleasure not tasted. And its subtle influence was abroad, magnetizing every twig and growing shrub, every hedge and every little water-covered plant. The renewal of Nature's strength was seen in all visible things and felt in the labyrinthine intricacies of human hearts. Some natures renew their strength with each returning spring; grow young with sight of the beginnings of life in the vegetable kingdom; and sad are they who know no such rejuvenations of heart, no such reincarnations of youthful feelings and inspirations. 
One there was in the great city whose heart's door was closed to the sweet whisperings of spring, whose best self was still wrapped in its winter shadow; in the sanctuary of which no music echoed, no happiness penetrated. It was a continual winter to the poor student, who, giving hospitality to doubt, was driven to entertain despair, and with two such guests at home how could peace or beauty be found abroad. None knew the inward misery, none brought the argand lamp to replace the poor rush light which dimly lighted the path "shadowed with darkness and guarded by despair". And the "still small voice" whispered on, though the clogged mind heard but rarely,and the soul seemed wrapped in a long sleep. 
Would it ever wake? 
Would the harp once touched by the fingers of a master ever be wholly discordant again? Would the melody be silent in the Aeolian harp swaying unseen in low green boughs? Could the soul once alive to the secret of the inner temple, the Holy of Holies, forget its own divinity and become again the sordid thing it had been in its ignorance? Could the aspiring pupil who had once heard the master's voice be lost to its power and think no more of its tones? A bowed head is bending over the writings preserved as sacred treasurers; the weary heart is sobbing a wail of woe upon the evening air, a longing soul is struggling to emerge from its tenement to express itself once more, while the listening spirit, breathless with attention, hears the heart, and mind, and soul, unite in one mad passionate appeal for help. The cry went up shrill, and loud, and deep,and reverberated in the night-wind over the hills and far away. 
The gathered strength had expended itself. The excitement of that moment was followed by a forced, unnatural calm , foreboding ill to the over-strong, exhausted frame. 
Will rescue come? 

 
The form is still, but is so because the agony is unendurable. Not death, but total darkness must follow, unless the madly reckless being is snatched from the fate impending. 
Must oblivion end all? Is there no pitying power at hand to quiet the frenzied brain? to renew the feeble breath? 
Hark! back again like the low soft sigh of a sleeping babe, when disturbed by its unconscious intensity of thought, that cry is echoed. Not with the piercing energy with which it was sent, is it returned, but with a murmuring sound that fell on the weary senses like a tone from bells rung on a high mountain, and heard in the distant valley below. Following it there came a note, clear and sweet, and wondrously like the voice silent so long, "Come". 
The call could not be misunderstood. 
The listener hears; springs up with head erect, lips glowing with heat, eyes flaming with light; and gathering strength in every fibre of the quivering, panting frame, sends it forth again in an exultant shout: - 
"Master! I come! thy will be done!" 

 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
It will be convenient before entering upon the question of the evolution of man to state shortly what, according to the Esoteric Doctrine, man is. It has been stated in recent theosophical publications that man is composed of seven principles But the analysis, in a great many instances , has been grievously misunderstood. An impression has been formed that a septenary human being is a very complicated kind of onion, from which coat after coat may be peeled off until nothing is left behind; that the different principles which go to constitute a man are put together by some process of chemical and mechanical combination. But the fact is, these principles lie on different planes of existence, and cannot therefore react upon each other in the same manner as objects lying on the same plane are found to do. The perception of each of these principles involves and requires a corresponding change in the conditions of the perceiving consciousness. The thread which links these different principles is what may be called the unit of consciousness, the individuality or the monad. Those who adopt the idealistic language express the same thing in a different way. 
It is not our purpose to describe in detail the different principles in man. To the reader who is acquainted with the division of man into body, soul and spirit, these pages will present no difficulty. The body,the physical encasement of the human entity, includes in itself the principle of life, which animates man in common with the animal, the vegetable, and other forms of existence which it is not necessary to mention here. The soul is the ethereal man, which, when seen outside the body, is known as the wraith, double, Doppelganger or astral body; it includes within itself the astral counterpart of the body, the principle of desire and the lower form of intellection The spirit consisting of the higher form of intellection and the spiritual ego, is overshadowed by the One Spirit,which constitutes the permanent basis of all existence. For convenience,however, the division is often made into body and spirit, or the sensuous and supersensuous man. 
Upon this subject,our revered Teachers says:-  
"As man is a sevenfold being, so is the universe; the septenary microcosm being to the septenary macrocosm but as the drop of rain-water to the cloud from which it dropped,and to which in the course of time, it will return. In the One are embraced or included so many tendencies for the evolution of air, fire, water, etc. (from the purely abstract down to their concrete conditions), and when those latter are called elements, it is to indicate their productive potentialities for numberless form-changes or evolutions of being. 
"Let us represent the unknown quantity as X: that quantity is the one eternal, immutable principle: and a, b, c, d, e, five of the six minor principles or components of the same- viz. the principles of earth, water, air, fire, and ether (akasa), following the order of their spirituality, and beginning with the lowest. There is a sixth principle answering to the sixth principle (called in the East, Buddhi) in man (to avoid confusion, remember that in viewing the question from the side of the descending scale, the abstract. All, or eternal principle, would be numerically designated as the first, and the phenomenal universe as the seventh, whether belonging to man or to the universe - viewed from the other side, the numerical order will be reversed); but we are not permitted to name it except among the Initiates. I may,however, hint that it is 

 
connected with the process of the highest intellection. Let us call it N; and beside these there is, under all the activities of the phenomenal universe, an energizing impulse from X - call this Y. Algebraically stated, our equation will therefore read: a + b+ c+ d+ e+ N +Y= X . Each of the first six letters represent, so to speak, the spirit or abstraction of what you call elements (your meager English gives me no other word). Thus spirit controls the entire line of evolution around the entire cycle of cosmic activity, in its own department, the informing, vivifying, evolving cause, behind the countless manifestations in that department of nature. 
"Let us work out the idea with a single example. Take fire: D, the prime igneous principle resident in X, is the ultimate cause of every phenomenal manifestation of fire on all the globes of the chain. The proximate causes are the evoluted secondary igneous agencies which severally control the seven descents of fire on each planet, every element having its seven principles, and every principle its seven sub-principles, and so these secondary agencies have in their turn to become primary causes. 
"D is a septenary compound, of which the highest fraction is pure spirit. As we see it on our globe, it is in its coarsest, most material condition, as gross in its way as is man in his physical encasement. In the next preceding globe to ours, fire was less gross than here; on the one before that , less still. So the body of flame was more and more pure, and less and less gross and material, on each antecedent planet. On the first of all in the cyclic chain, it appeared as an almost pure objective shining - the Maha Buddhi, the sixth principle of he eternal light. ....... On each globe of the chain there are seven manifestations of fire, of which the first in order will compare, as to its spiritual quality, with the last manifested on the next preceding planet: the process being reversed as you will infer, with the opposite arc. The myriad specific manifestations of these six universal elements are in their turn but the offshoots, branches, or branchlets of the one single primordial tree of life." 
The septenary division adopted by the different schools of the Esoteric philosophy, has in many cases called forth against it the charge of puerility. A closer acquaintance with the subject, however, must needs impress one with the strictly scientific character of this method of classification. Following the mystic idealists, we may divide the whole range of existence into different states of consciousness, with their appropriate objects or functions. According to these philosophers, existence is coextensive with consciousness; absolute unconsciousness is absolute negation. Now, it is within ordinary experience that consciousness manifests itself in three different states, namely, the consciousness of a man awake, the consciousness of a man dreaming, and the consciousness of one in a state of dreamless slumber. The first two states are recognized by all, the last requires a few words of explanation. It is true, in waking moments one has some conception of the dreaming consciousness, but none at all of the consciousness of dreamless slumber; its existence, nevertheless, is proved by the fact that the identity of the ego is never lost, and the beginning and conclusion of such slumber are strung together in consciousness. Had there been a cessation of all consciousness for one moment there is no conceivable reason for its reappearance. Besides these three states, all mystics hold, as no doubt is the case, that there is a fourth state of consciousness, which may be called transcendental consciousness. A glimpse of this state may be obtained in the abnormal condition of exstasis. 
As to the objects of these states of consciousness it is easily seen that they exhaust the whole range of existence. All that admits of perception by the senses belongs to the first state of consciousness, which is conditioned by our familiar notions of time and space. The objects perceived in dreams, though possessing all the elements of reality to the dreamer, are not identical with the objects of waking 

 
consciousness, although similar to them. The dreamer's notions of time and space are different from those of the man awake. A change in these notions involves a corresponding change in the nature of objects to which the characteristic of reality is assigned. A miser dreaming of acquisition of wealth experiences as much pleasure as when actually feasting his eyes on his accumulated treasures. While awake, however, the wealth acquired in dream will excite no interest. Similarly, while dreaming, the fact that the acquisition will not preserve its reality in waking life, will have, if noticed at all, only a moment's recognition and then be forced out of the mind, as it plunges deeper into the contemplation of the objects dreamed of. The last phenomenon is noted by all who pay any attention to their dreams and the laws governing them. The objects of waking consciousness are usually called material, and their counterparts perceptible by the dreamer have been called astral, adopting the phraseology of Paracelsus and his fellow-thinkers. The objects of the other two states of consciousness, being beside our present purpose, do not call for more than passing recognition. 
The four states of consciousness mentioned above, it is hardly necessary to note, are not separated from each other by impassable chasms, but are all closely interrelated and form one synthetic whole. A little consideration will show that these four states, combined in the way contemplated, must produce six states; the synthetic unity of them all being the seventh. If the four points of a square be taken to represent the four states, their combinations will produce the four sides of the square and the two diagonals - six in all - and the figure itself. The result of the combination, considered apart from its components, will be represented by a circumscribing circle. In this symbol, which had its origin in remote antiquity, the circle is the infinite . All from which phenomenal existence, emblematized by the square and its diagonals, proceeds. Hence, squaring the circle is sometimes taken to symbolize the process of evolution. 
The interdependence of the subject and objects of consciousness will be clearly perceived form the above considerations. The seven states of consciousness viewed in reference to the subject, man, are the seven individual principles, and in reference to the object, matter, are the seven universal cosmic principles; the seventh principle, however, in each case includes in itself the other six, and in point of fact, though forming the last term in both these classifications, is really one. In the infinite the subject and the object merge into each other. 
Each of these principles is divided into seven; and each subdivisions is again divided into seven; the septenary division in fact is carried on indefinitely. Our revered Teacher says on this point:-" Whenever any question of evolution or development in any kingdom presents itself to you, bear constantly in mind that everything comes under the septenary rule of series in these correspondences and mutual relations throughout Nature." The number of septenary divisions being limitless, no nomenclature is capable of exhibiting the real interrelations of all the terms. But if cross division is guarded against, each septenary will be found complete in itself and the comprehension of one septenary will render it easy to pursue the investigations backwards and forwards by following the Law of Correspondences. 
There is one peculiarity of these septenary divisions which requires prominent mention. In tracing the process by which the present state of man and his universe evolved from anterior states, it is plain, the beginning must be made at the other pole. The present state is objective and material, the starting point must therefore be subjective and spiritual; it must not be forgotten, however, that these terms are relative and not absolute. In the ultimate reality matter and spirit are identical; matter in that connection being but what Kant calls objective reality, and spirit abstract consciousness. The mystical philosophers maintain 

 
that the ultimate reality is absolute consciousness, which has objective existence and is not insubstantial, unreal. According to the the language of some Brahmanical philosophers the ultimate reality is the mystic union of Prakriti (Matter) and Purusha (Spirit). 
To return to our subject from abstract metaphysical considerations which need not detain us longer than necessary for the elucidation of the theme which concerns us more immediately. In every septenary the first and the last will be respectively Matter and Spirit, or Spirit and Matter, according as we view it from the side of evolution or involution. The process of evolution is endless, and the last principle has always to work back to the first, but on a higher plane; if the curve of evolution re-entered into itself, the process would come to an end. The fitting symbol of evolution is not a circle, but a spiral eternally progressing. 
Evolution,or the manifestation of one permanent Noumenon in an infinite variety of phenomenal existence, involves in itself the notion of cycles, and can only be understood by being studied in some particular and defined period of time. In the phenomenal universe, we find that no point of time can be thought of without thinking of previous points of time. It is clear therefore that an object which exists at any given moment, must have always existed before, in some form or other. The pre-existing form is said to cause the subsequent form; further consideration will show that cause and effect differ only in form but are identical in substance, and that the effect always contains in itself the cause. It is one of the fundamental propositions of Eastern philosophical systems that the effect is the unfoldment of the cause in time. The only method by which the recondite facts of man's spiritual evolution can be presented to the general reader is that of deductions from universal truths relating to the nature of his consciousness. These metaphysical truths are consequently to be borne in mind for a correct understanding of the subject. 
Evolution, as we have seen, admits of study only in its progress during any given period of time; and this period of time is marked off into cycles and sub-cycles, according to the development of the seven principles and their endless septenary divisions. Extant literature of the Esoteric Doctrine discloses only one chapter of the great book of Evolution - the period of our planetary Manvantara. At the commencement of this period the material or rather objective universe of humanity slowly emerges from its spiritual or subjective condition, and then having reached its consummation resolves back into spiritual existence. The ante-natal spiritual condition of man's universe is such as to be subjective to all egos which can, in any sense be called human. 
The evolutionary process of which we are the products requires for its complete unfoldment seven planets, corresponding to the seven principles of the human universe. The evolution of the entire system is too vast and complicated to be described within any reasonable limits. A small section of it only can be traced, leaving the student to follow out the rest, with the help of the Law of Correspondences. 
It has been stated that the planetary Manvantara, as well as the whole range of existence evolved in it, are divided into an indefinite number of septenaries. Remembering this and the other fact that the evolutionary process works spirally and in alternate periods of relative activity and repose,the subject becomes easy of comprehension. We may for our present purpose consider the evolutionary process as a spiral with seven curves. Emerging from the spiritual or subjective condition, which to us egos, imprisoned in matter, is a perfect blank, the evolving existence describes the first curve producing the first representative of spiritual life in the material or objective universe. This is the first principle of our 

 
planetary system. To a being whose perceptions can cognize the ante-natal spiritual condition of our universe as objective, this first principle will have an analogy to the first spiritual principle; for the law of septenaries obtains as much in the spiritual as in material existence. But to another, whose objective perception does not penetrate beyond the first material principle, all the seven spiritual principles will be present in this one. The next wave of evolution, producing the second principle, is represented by the curve, which was contained in the first in a potential, or unmanifested condition, and which in its own turn contains the first, as the effect includes the cause. The same relation is continued all through. To come to particulars, each of the seven curves is really a spiral itself, formed by seven curves, among which the same interrelations subsist as among the major curves; all the subdivisions proceed in a similar manner. The illustration adopted applies to the principles and sub-principles evolved as well as to the time occupied in their evolution. 
It is not within the scope of the present treatise to chronicle the history of evolution during a Manvantara of our planetary system, or to trace the development of its seven principles. We directly deal only with the progress of human evolution on the planet, our present home. The fact, however, is not to be lost sight of, nor can it be too often reiterated, that by analogy the process may be extended indefinitely by the thoughtful student.  
Since the first human monads began their present objective course humanity or rather its spiritual counterpart has swept along the entire planetary chain three times, and has for the fourth time reached the fourth planet of the series, earth. During these planetary circuits, which have been called Rounds, the monads, recognizable on earth as human, cannot properly be so called when evolving on other planets. It is only in the present fourth Round that men, at all like those we can conceive of, have developed. 
Before reaching the perfection attainable in a Round, humanity has to pass on this earth through seven minor circuits, called Rings. Previous expositions of the Esoteric Doctrine, intended to give only the broadest outlines of human evolution, are silent on the subject of Rings. The introduction of this new factor, however, need not create confusion if we hold fast to the Law of Correspondences. The ring we are at present describing is the fourth. 
Simultaneously with the development of humanity through Rounds and Rings the earth itself undergoes a corresponding development. With each round a dimension is added to man's conception of space. The fourth dimension of space will be a common fact of human consciousness before the fourth Round is completed. The existence, which with the Round begins to work itself from its spiritual into its objective or material counterpart, undergoes a further development in each Ring. 
Little difficulty will be experienced in applying these observations to Rounds and Rings, or to the subdivisions of the latter which will be treated of further on. [ At present each of the five elements composing our sensuous Nature contains within it a certain proportion of the other four in their subtle forms, or rather, in their intermediate condition between what would be called matter and spirit. Fire, for instance, contains within it eight parts of its own subtle or astral counterpart and two of each of the other four. The number of components (sixteen) in an element, corresponds with the four Rounds and four Rings. The complexity of the subject precludes further details, which alone could have rendered the exposition complete. ] As to the duration of the different divisions of time mentioned above, it is to be noted that in each septenary the period goes on diminishing in a fixed proportion until the minimum is 

 
reached in the fourth,when increasing in the same way it attains the maximum in the seventh. 
No human being, with the exception of Adepts of a certain order, can get out of the attraction of the earth before the seven Rings are accomplished, but there are exceptional men who by the force of their personal exertions have outstripped their fellowmen by one complete Ring, and are thus developing their fifth principle (intellect) on a higher plan. These have been spoken of as the normal fifth Rounders, because the difference between Rings and Rounds has not been accurately defined till now. When a human being escapes from the necessity of describing these Rings, and passes to the next planet in advance, he ceases to be strictly a human being; and it is not within the present scheme to explore the mystery of such planetary existence. 

 
CHAPTER II  
SUPRA-MUNDANE MAN 
All the records extant of man proceed from a common starting point, that of his earliest attempts at material existence. None of them, not even those which have much to say regarding man's spiritual nature, take into account the most important- the stupendous fact, that long before the morning twilight of his material birthday he had passed through,on this planet, an era of immense duration as a spiritual being; a being whose destiny was a gradual descent into matter, but in whose hands lay, in a large measure, his own career . A planetary spirit man was before he became a spiritual man, and finally man a child of this earth. He became by slow degrees master, in a material sense, of his new home - the arbiter of his own destiny in it. Though subject to its environment and physical limitations, he went through various gradations of conditions before he was able to comprehend the cosmogony of which he formed a part. 
It is in place here to quote some general remarks of our Teacher on the evolution of man, from his pre existing spiritual condition,which admit of application to all special cases: - 
"Now there are, and there must be, failures in the ethereal races of the many classes of Dhyan Chohans or Devas,[ Progressed entities of a previous planetary period. For particulars vide infra. ] as well as among men. But still as the failures are too far progressed and spiritualized to be thrown back forcibly from Dhyan Chohanship into the vortex of a new primordial evolution through the lower kingdoms, this then happens. Where a new solar system has to evolved these Dhyan Chohans are borne in by influx "ahead" of the elementals [ entities on the subjective plane of existence to be developed into humanity at a future time ], [ Vide infra. ] and remain as latent or inactive spiritual force, in the aura of a nascent world of the new system, until the stage of human evolution is readied .... Then they become an active force and commingle with the elementals,to develop little by little the full type of humanity." 
This development of spiritual entities into material existence, or as it is commonly called "descent of spirit into matter", is but one factor in the great problem of human evolution; the formation of his physical body being the other. As man's nature is dual - physical and spiritual, - so there are two elements of his evolution. On the spiritual side he is descended from the Dhyan Chohans,on the material from the highest type of animal life existent when his association with matter began. The student may meet with some difficulty in harmonizing the two aspects of evolution, but a dutiful adherence to the law of analogy will not fail to furnish a clue to the intricacies of the subject. 
It has been implied above that other forms of existence had evolved on earth prior to the appearance of the first human entities. The six orders of existence which preceded man were, the three elemental kingdoms imperceptible by us, and the mineral, vegetable and animal kingdoms. It must not, however, be supposed that these kingdoms possessed any of their present physical properties at the first start of human evolution. On the contrary, the fact is that all physical properties cognizable by us have grown with our growth. It is a general law that from the moment that a superior kingdom comes into being a retardation of development is imposed on all the inferior ones. Under the operation of this law of retardation,the inferior kingdoms have made little or no progress since the tide of man's evolution set in. 

 
We need not here speak of the elemental kingdoms, as the ordinary man possesses hardly any knowledge of their nature. Regarding the other three kingdoms, it is to be noted that the lower the investigation penetrates the less does it find any sign of progress during the human period. The mineral kingdom has progresses the least, next on the line of ascent is the vegetable kingdom, and the animal kingdom has developed most of the three. When the human entities from their spiritual condition began to press towards physical existence the highest type of animal form advanced a step higher to receive them. The impression must not be formed that physical frames already developed, were waiting for the human entities to come and inhabit them; for the fact is that the spiritual entities in manifesting themselves objectively evolved the higher types from the pre-existing animal forms. The condition of the lower forms of existence at the birth of man on earth, will have some light thrown upon it by the condition of the first races of man, described further on. The state of the lower kingdoms during the periods of their respective predominance is beyond our comprehension, as the layers of matter through which they progressed are beyond the range of our present perception. We must not leave this part of the subject without the remark that the changes of the lower forms of life contemplated above are not the changes studied by by the geologist and paleontologists, whose observations are confined to one of the many planes of material existence, namely, the one cognizable by us. Nor should we omit to mention the important fact, that the entities now evolving on this planet in the inferior kingdoms will not attain to the human state in this planetary period. 
These observations prepare the way for the consideration of the state of man on his first appearance on earth during this Ring. The first representatives of humanity, as we know it on this earth, were, strictly speaking, supra-mundane or spiritual men, and not terrestrial beings. Their grossest principles did not descend lower than an ethereal or, more correctly, astral body; they were men only in the sense that the seed is the tree, and, going further back, the potential energy the seed itself. The seven purely spiritual races which in this Ring preceded the appearance of physical man, consisted of beings with whom the man of science has no historical acquaintance, and whom he very naturally will repudiate. He will at once fly to the defence of his position with the assertion that the world was not habitable at a stage anterior to the stone age; and to tell him that the planet was the home of living human creatures before the glacial period is to outrage his geologic sense. Even the evidence that European man existed as early as the Upper Tertiary age is disputed. 
It should be remembered that when the word "habitable" is applied to this planet, its meaning is limited by the sense in which we define the first man and his requirements. And again, it should be remembered as the fundamental anthropological fact upon which we base the statements herein put forward, that with the evolution of the seven spiritual races which preceded man the earth was fitted for his habitation. The Egyptian seven gods of the elements are the symbols for these seven primitive races, and the seven Elohim of the Hebrews are identical with the seven Rishis of India. 
The first races were speechless, as were their spiritual prototypes, the former being but materialized copies of the latter. If the subsequent races of men found themselves gifted with speech, it is because they were fashioned "in the image" of the "seven gods" of the living word or speech of the Taos. There is not a people but had this tradition; not a race but preserved it. Even the savage Hurons have their "seven spirits of the breath", or uttered thought or word; which spirits they invoke, and who are only the prototypes of the first speaking races. To the time of the first race which "fell into generation", the human races had all and each their paradigms. These spiritual races were in turn developed and instructed by planetary spirits of a much higher order of existence than any race of man has yet attained. The word 

 
"spiritual" should not be misunderstood. In this connection it has reference, not to disembodied human beings, but to orders of existence not yet developed through matter to be a part of the material world in which they were placed by the cosmic law. In other words, they did not represent that principle in man which survives as an entity after gross matter has been thrown off, but beings whose destiny was to reach the plane of matter from another, and to come to it by means as natural as that by which the grub evolves into the butterfly. 
Nature, perceptible by us at present only in its five rudimentary material aspects, has in store for those who seek to unravel its mysteries with the developed sixth and seventh principles, a wealth of wisdom elevating to contemplate; and the elementary truths contained in these pages are but a small portion of the mass of information which the earnest student may discover for himself, will he but seek, with half the ardor with which he denies, the existence of conditions and events of which he has no knowledge. The methodical experimentalist feels a contempt for the erratic child of genius who knows neither rule nor rote, but lisping in numbers as the numbers come, gives utterance to the thoughts that well up from depths within. Yet the world is with the inspired one, for he touches chords of sympathy which vibrate and reverberate in human hearts, awakening with each touch some slumbering memory of their spirit existence, or some premonitions of their future life, not clearly defined in the consciousness of the progeny of matter. 
The inner or soul-truths which the men of this race but vaguely conceive will by the next, the sixth race, be perceived in their objective forms, and their interior beauty will be sensed with as much ease as the existence of a world of spirit is sensed by the advanced men of this fifth race. 
The first human entities upon this earth were living germs in motion, "winged globes" of Egypt, or "Scarabei," as they are now called. From these germs through ages of time evoluted the seven races of ethereal beings, man's ancestors on earth - pre-human beings, if we may so define them. These embryonic manifestations of life in their earliest state possessed but one instinct, that of motion, and moved (to all appearances) aimlessly about, serving no other purpose than do many of the lower forms of life about us. 
Were we masters of nature's secrets, we could unravel these mysteries. There are men who have attained a degree of spiritual and physical development which enables them to perceive the inner working of cosmic laws, and this development is reached through the education of the seven senses of man in their dual nature, spiritual as well as physical. These fortunate exceptions are so little know to their fellow-men that it is next to an impossibility to convince people in any age of their existence. The occupants of the earth at the time when incipient man appeared were, beside animals (of course not as now known), "nature-spirits." They were the spirits, representing the astral prototypes of trees and other orders of vegetation, as also the corresponding prototypes of the minerals and metals. They possessed no evoluted sense, and were provided with but one feeling - that of blind instinct. There were also elementals of a different order,who were subsequently evolved into men, as we shall see further on. 
Our earliest forefathers, the first physical descendants of the supra-mundane man, were beings born to a state which we do not of ourselves comprehend, but of which we gather hints from those who have retained for us the knowledge, fragments of which they are now imparting. The cradle of the first objective race of man in the present Ring was the North Pole, which at the time we are speaking of was 

 
almost on the ecliptic. Since that period the poles and the equator have changed places. It may surprise those astronomers who believe that they have completely solved the problem of the precession of the equinoxes by a chain of mathematical reasoning, and they may perhaps reject this statement with scorn, but the fact is that the inclination of the earth's axis to the plane of the ecliptic undergoes a secular change [ We are aware that this statement is opposed to mathematical physics, to which the able and thoughtful papers of Mr. G.H.Darwin form the latest contribution. But what physicist will venture to affirm that all the data for the determination of the question are known? Certainly no astronomer who has attempted the as yet unsolved problem of the secular acceleration of the moon's motion] and future discoveries will support our position. The geologist, whose store of knowledge has received important additions from the discovery of beds of coal in very high latitudes, will probably even now find this assertion suggestive. 
Before passing on, it must be reiterated that the different epochs of the history of human evolution here referred to, were periods in which countless thousands of beings lived their appointed time and disappeared from the earth; otherwise, erroneous impressions will be received regarding this subject, which it is designed to deal with only in broad features, and not in details. 
We propose to sketch the history of human evolution in this Ring from the spiritual to the physical condition. But it is not practicable to trace the course of development through all the seven races of the Ring or minor septenaries, the sub-races. The general outline that follows will enable the readers to work out the details for themselves. The Law of Correspondences is preserved all through. What is true of any particular sub-race of a race, is true, on a higher plane of the corresponding sub-race of the succeeding race. 

 
CHAPTER III 
PHYSICAL EVOLUTION OF MAN; OR, DESCENT INTO MATTER 
In tracing the development of the objective man from his subjective predecessors, mentioned in the preceding chapter, it must be steadily borne in mind that at the beginning of each Ring the process described is always repeated; but with each subsequent period, the duration of this process becomes shorter. Nature finds it easier to repeat even on a higher plane that to evolve afresh. The facility acquired by nature in repeating something it has once accomplished is well illustrated in the development of the human foetus;: within the short space of seven months the embryonic germ moves through the complete diapason of organic evolution, because humanity as a whole, in working up to its present position, has already passed over all the intermediate steps. The development of the physical sense of the human entity and its physical encasement forms his descent into matter, or physical evolution. It is proposed in this chapter to give a brief outline of the physical evolution of the first objective race of the present Ring. 
When we speak of "Primitive Peoples," we do not refer to the first people who dwelt upon the earth, but to the first objective race of this Ring, who are known to later races as the Adamic men. It has been mentioned in the previous chapter that the number of ethereal races in the present Ring was seven; each of these races developed one astral sense until the seventh race had all the seven senses developed as far as the existing conditions admitted. It is difficult for men not having more than five sense to imagine what the other two senses are, but it must not be forgotten that our present state is by no means perfect. The seventh-race men of this Ring will perhaps have equal difficulty to conceive how we could have existed with only five senses. When the tide of evolution took the first turn towards objective life, humanity had to evolve on the material plane, one after another, the seven astral senses which its pre human ancestors possessed. The first race of this Ring, it is well known, had, like all other races, seven sub-races. Each one of these sub-races developed, so far as material development was attainable by it, one of the seven senses. The seventh sub-race had all the seven senses physically developed up to a certain degree. The first sub-race of the second race took up the earliest developed sense from the point where it was left at the close of the first race, and carried it forward a step higher. The second sub-race treated the next developed sense similarly, so that each one of the senses attained higher perfection with each sub-race of the succeeding race, until at last, by the middle of the third race, man become as we know him now, only less developed. 
The succeeding races have carried forward this evolution higher and higher in the same order. The common type of a race is always preserved by its various sub-races, which at each step becomes more and more developed on the physical plane, with a corresponding loss of some particular astral sense possessed by their supra-mundane predecessors. 
Man thus began to advance on the physical plane by developing one of the seven senses. The first sub race of the first objective race slowly acquired the sense of physical sight, which, it may be remarked, included in itself the six others in their latent or potential state. Simultaneously with the growth of this new sense there was a corresponding growth of external nature. The astral senses of the supra-mundane man perceived but the astral counterpart of all the objects of nature, as now known to us. It is very difficult for the average man of today to realize how the present sensuous nature existed merely as its shadow, and at the same time possessed real and objective character. But it will be remember that, when a dreaming man perceives astral objects, he finds no deficiency of reality in them. With the nascent 

 
faculty of sight the world slowly commenced to assume a different character; external nature by degrees acquired visibility, as we understand it, though unaccompanied by any of the other properties which we invariably associate with visible objects. 
The properties of objects corresponding to the other senses had not yet evolved; those senses themselves were still unknown. For these primitive men the leaves did not rustle, the flowers did not smell, nor did they disclose to the eyes variety of colours. Sight being their only developed sense, they had no notion of either distance or solidity. But this sense at the beginning was unlimited in range. Pre human man could fathom the mysteries of the sun and sky, and could watch start which baffle the mightiest telescope. The first sub-race, with its newly developed sight, could have no realization of darkness, for no object was completely opaque. Light varied in intensity, but a knowledge of the contrast felt by us between day and night had not dawned upon the first representatives of the race. Sight at this period had not developed to a perception of colour. The first men failed to note the varied hues of the rainbow; and the grass, the trees, and the animals were not to them, as they are to us, of different colours. The evolution of the perception of colour is intimately bound up with the evolution of the races and sub-races of humanity. When the sense of sight was first developed man failed to perceive any of the prismatic colours. To him everything appeared perfectly colourless - white; but before the first sub race of the first objective race had reached its apex, and yielded place to its successors, the colour red was distinguished. Each sub-race developed the perception of one more of the prismatic colours in the order in which they occur, beginning with the red; and each succeeding race had to regain for itself the perception of the colours of the rainbow, although in continually diminishing periods of time, and on each occasion recognizing a much larger variety of shades of colour. The earlier ancestors of our race did not perceive more than three principal colours - red, yellow, and green; two in perfection, and the third only to a limited extent. That our eyes in the present day can enjoy such rich repast of colours is due to the fact that we are recovering as well as adding to the knowledge which was once possessed by the men of preceding races. Toward the close of this sub-race period human sight, hitherto unlimited, began to feel the limitations of distance and opacity. This was due to the influence of a nascent sense which marked the appearance of the sub-race that followed. The presence of the new sense, touch, considerably modified the perception of things, and, by the combination of these two senses, new conceptions, such as those of solidity, distance, temperature, began their development. 
It must not be omitted here that toward the close of this period the sense of hearing - to a very slight extent, however - began to show itself, but it did not receive much development until at a later stage, as will be seen further on. The second sub-race inherited the sense of sight, and developed for itself the sense of touch. The latter sense at the beginning had a much wider range than at a subsequent period. This might, at first sight, appear difficult of comprehension, but those who have observed how the blind develop their hearing and touch to abnormal delicacy and acuteness will understand how the multiplicity of senses blunts the keenness of any particular faculty. To the early people touch was something like the psychometric faculty possessed by a certain type of clairvoyants, though much more intense. In point of fact, this faculty received such a high degree of interior development that it revealed the inner as well as the outer nature of the objects to which it was applied. By touch a new source of enjoyment was opened and a fresh bond was established between man and his surroundings. As sense after sense was born, link after link was forged in this chain, and veil upon veil was thrown upon the long vista of his spiritual recollections. By continued association with things of clay he adapted himself to his new home, until at last his thoughts traveled no further. 

 
The sense of touch, which germinated in the first sub-race, attained its limiting development in the second. With the evolution of the succeeding sub-race man ceased to be any longer an ethereal being, and became a comparatively materialized creature, endowed with several elementary senses, of which one only, hearing, was accentuated, and became peculiarly characteristic of the third sub-race. 
This sub-race rejoiced in the triple faculties of sight, touch, and hearing, the two former as developed physical senses, the two previous sub-races having materialized them, and the latter as both spiritual and physical. This faculty being a new inheritance, was at first wholly spiritual, just as the faculty of thought-transference is a spiritual faculty to the fifth, our present race, but will become a physical faculty to sixth -race men. So long as a faculty is only spiritual it cannot be the common property of the race; it will be possessed by men constituted differently from the generality of their fellow-men, or by those who undergo a definite course of training in order to acquire it. But when the race en bloc rises up to the level of these few, the faculty in question ceases to be spiritual, and is enjoyed by the race at large as a physiological heritage. 
The extent of the power of hearing possessed by the third sub-race of the third-race men was so great in comparison with ours as to be hardly credible today. The spiritual ear had received its greatest amount of development and physical hearing itself attained a very high degree of acuteness. Even the sound of the leaf budding greeted with its natural music the ears of these primitive habitants of our planet. As colour 
after colour was added to the early flower, its rhythmic dance was not unperceived by the yet unworn sense of hearing. It must have been with something of the exquisite delight with which we of today, who have the musical perception largely developed, hear the divine strains of a symphony or an oratorio, that they listened to this music. A new charm was added to life, and man viewed with ever-growing satisfaction and complacency the congenial world about him. 
The metrical motion of the heavenly bodies around us, which men call the music of the spheres, and which they believe is unheard by the mortal ear on account of its grossness, was to these elder-born children of nature an abiding strain of joy. 
"Look, how the floor of heaven 
Is thick inlaid with patines of bright gold: 
There's not the smallest orb which thou behold' st 
But in his motion like an angel sings, 
Still quiring to the young-eyed cherubims: 
Such harmony is in immortal souls; 
But whilst this muddy vesture of decay 
Doth grossly close it in, we cannot hear it." 
[From the "Merchant of Venice, act. 5, sc.1.] 
Physical grossness shuts out from us many other joys of nature besides its music, as is known to those whose senses are refined by training or nature. At that time the spiritual ear had fully expanded, and the harmony between the spiritual and the physical nature of man made it possible for this sense to be more acute than it has ever been in any subsequent race for the generality. But these are men living in the present day who have not only retained the marvellous power of hearing possessed by our ancestors of 

 
the third race, but by constant cultivation have developed the faculty to an even more remarkable degree of perfection. The exception human beings we allude to have wondrously maintained this power of hearing, and, as is well known in India and elsewhere, speak across space, and can be heard by those whose spiritual sense of hearing can control the physical counterpart and subordinate it when desired. Distance presents no obstacle to the spiritual ear, and souls in spiritual sympathy respond to catch other's call from the ends of the world. 
The fourth sub-race, it will be seen, started with three well-developed senses, sight, touch, and hearing. The sense of smell- which belongs peculiarly to this sub-race, was at its birth both a spiritual and a physical faculty. The spiritual sense of smell had many of the properties which we associate with seeing, touching, and hearing. Even now naturalists know how this sense, in some insects, does the duty of nearly all senses; the importance of the sense of smell to certain animals, notably dogs, need hardly be mentioned. The evolution of this sense added another coating to nature, thus justifying the adoption by the ancients of the onion as the symbol of evolution. Objects which before could be only seen, felt, and heard, now for the first time acquired the property of odour. 
The sense of taste was developed by the fifth sub-race.At first the human body did not require food to support life, and even at as late a period as the time when the fourth sub-race developed the sense of smell, man ate nothing, but imbibed nutriment by the osmose from the air. It was only when his body became condensed, and in a sense gross, that repairs of the system had to be made by food taken into the stomach. The first and second races did not feel the necessity of supplying the waste of tissues by food. Properly speaking, man did not become an eating animal on this planet, in our Fourth Ring, until the close of the second race. 
The senses developed by the sixth and seventh sub-races are inconceivable to us, who have only five sense developed- though to a much higher degree than the humanity of any previous period - and having the other two senses in a very elementary condition. 
In those days nothing disagreeable was experienced through the senses, In fact, no sense in its incipient stages can ever bear any sensation unpleasant to man. Unpleasantness being the product of disharmony or violation of the natural order of things, could only have arisen after the senses had become sufficiently associated with external objects. Physical pain was, so to say, brought about by the misuse of our senses, and not by their use. The Biblical myth, that God cursed the earth on the fall of Adam, has a deeply significant meaning. Man in his nature state knew not the abuse of any sense or organ, and hence was free from all pain connected with their exercise. In childhood, although the acuteness of the senses is far greater than afterwards, children do not experience to as great a degree as the adult the painful feelings which senses are capable of producing. They are, for instance, capable of bearing bad odours without much annoyance. The vision of children is clearer and more far-reaching than that of the adult; but their eyes cannot recognize delicate shadings of colour. Hearing in childhood extends over a much wider range than afterwards; they can detect notes much higher and sounds much lower than the average grown-up man, but the semitones and other finer divisions they do not perceive. In the dawn of life the strength of the different organs is most remarkable, and the pleasure derived from their exercise is greatest. Sounds discordant to the average ear are often not without attraction for the young. The analogy may be pursued all through, and the differences between the qualities of the juvenile and the adult senses may be noted. Children's taste for strong flavours, and their incapacity to sympathize with delicate sensibilities, are well known, and observation of infant life renders it clear that 
