

It will be abundantly clear from what has been said above, that in the earlier races elementaries had no existence; it was only when humanity had considerably descended into matter that they came into being. The intimate connection of the mystery of death with the nature of elementaries is obvious. The alliance between elementaries and elemental spirits has been already hinted at. It grew out of the natural dependence of the latter upon man, who suffers from its unfortunate consequences unto the present day, in manifold ways, and with ever-increasing intensity. The elementaries, galvanized into activity by the elemental beings, began to appear to man under as many varieties of shape as his hopes and fears allowed. And as his ignorance of things spiritual became denser, these agencies brought in an influx of error, which accelerated his spiritual degeneration. Thus, it will be seen that man's neglect of his duty to the nature spirits is the cause which has launched him into a sea of troubles, that has shipwrecked so many generations of his descendants. Famines, plagues, wars, and other catastrophes, are not so disconnected with the agency of nature-spirits as it might appear to the sceptical mind. Adepts alone, in these latter ages, have remained faithful to man's higher duty towards these undeveloped creatures. The first awakening ray of forgotten knowledge, at the beginning of the brighter cycle which has now set in, reveals to sight the elementaries on account of their more immediate connection with mankind. But buried under ages of materiality, man is almost entirely unable to apprehend the knowledge thus communicated, and has in consequence fallen into a confused state of mind as to things spiritual. 

 
The adepts have seized this opportunity to instruct man regarding his relations with the elementaries and nature-spirits. To do this effectively, these great souls recapitulate the history of man upon the earth, take him to the starting-point, and read to him the ineffaccable record of his own career, which they are enabled to do through their superior knowledge; and this knowledge they have placed at the service of mankind in order that materiality may be arrested in its fatal progress, and some of its evils be averted while yet possible. Every day the true history of man's infancy is becoming more and more encrusted with falsehoods and fancies, and all interest in his origin and destiny is rapidly dying out. It is borne in upon the mind of an individual here and there, that the truth has not been told about himself and his kind. The blessing that the adepts now hold out to man is the key to unlock some of the mysteries of his existence, but the current method of thought is so diametrically opposed to intuition that the world at large rejects the blessing, and discredits the testimony of those who offer it. 

 
CHAPTER V 
EVOLUTION OF SEX 
Without going very far back in the cycle of evolution, it may be stated that there was an epoch when human beings were bisexual. The memory of this state is preserved in many religion myths. We shall only refer to the account of Ardhanarisvara, the bisexual Lord among the Brahmans. By the Western people this knowledge is to be found in the Jewish Scriptures, if they will only have the eyes to see. "Male and female created he them and blessed them, and called their name Adam" (Gen. V. 2) 
Until towards the latter part of the second race, the only discernible germs of sex were confined to the mental plane. A tendency in individuals towards the general and the abstract developed the man, and a tendency towards the particular and the concrete led to the evolution of the woman. If we eliminate the minor difference between the sexes, this is observed to be the basic distinction; in fact the minor differences are produced by the pressure of the mental attributes already mentioned seeking expression on the physical plane. As a rule, the man has more capacity for abstract, and the woman for concrete thought. It is a safe guide in predicting the next following incarnation of a human being to bear this fact in mind. No amount of cultivation of abstract thought will, however, enable one, unless an adept, to transcend the average of the race. On reaching the limit of male attributes female incarnation will become a necessity. A man to be perfected requires to develop in himself all the peculiar excellences of the woman, in addition to his own; and similarly, a woman, those of the man. 
In the light of esoteric teaching, a deeper truth will be discovered in what would otherwise be meaningless. "And the Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam, and he slept: and he took one of his ribs, and closed up the flesh instead thereof; and the rib which the Lord God had taken from man made he a woman." (Gen. ii. 21-22) 
In obedience to the necessity of fully realizing all the possibilities in Nature the sexes differentiated. Each of the two sets of mental attributes mentioned above demanded development to their fullest extent. By the cultivation of one particular set entities determined their sex. Organs unused began to disappear and others became invigorated by exercise. This evolution of sex if often referred to as the "fall into generation", which dates from the time when man became an eating animal. With the differentiation of sex came the sexual instinct and reproduction of the species as now prevalent. 
The sexual feeling in its incipiency was but an undefined instinct, and when it had become pronounced, it was gratified as naturally and without forethought as any other physiological craving. The greatest curse which attends the exercise of this function among us, as all people of uncorrupted sensibility know, is the absence of natural consent of the pair. In the earlier stages, when disguise and pretence did not exist, such a thing was impossible. 
As man went on adding layer upon layer of materiality to his life, he lost his spiritual powers. The most valuable one that he thus lost was his ability to develop elemental beings into men. The Kabalists refer to the children of Adam before he knew Eve. These were the elementals who were, by the exertions of man, evolved into humanity, as he, in his turn, had been by the planetary spirits. Having lost the power of 

 
creation, the natural law forced man to fall back upon pro-creation. And until man had departed very far from the original conditions he possessed the earth and all its belongings, and enjoyed them in peace. Women did not cry travailing in birth and in pain to be delivered, but child-bearing was as simple a matter as waking or sleeping, or locomotion from one place to another. 
As man's material progress advanced, his inner being became enveloped by the grossness of his outer nature, and each, wrapped up in himself, separated from his fellow-man. The loss of transparency of thought thus brought about affected th sexual relations most detrimentally; whereas before the intercourse between man and woman had been free and harmonious, it now became, through the increasing spiritual obscuration, marred by discord and disharmony. The barrier that was built up by growing materiality between the inner and the outer nature, gave rise for the first time to mistakes o fact in the intercourse of human beings, which finally resulted in the appearance of feelings of doubt and distrust of each other; in fact, to the first notions of untruth. The inability to see the working of another's mind led to frequent conflicts between the statements made by one about one's self, and what another expected of one; hence arose confusion, which in course of time hardened into falsehood and suspicion. Women were originally the equals of men in physical strength as in other qualities; but in particular cases a man stronger than a woman who rejected his addresses, did not hesitate to subjugate her to his passion, through his failure to comprehend a different feeling on her part. This was the first sexual sin. Treading on its steps appeared another and a more grievous one. Wherever there were numerous males equally attracted by the same female, the successful rival had the opportunity of satisfying two passions of his nature at one and the same time - namely, vanity and lust. This caused the sexual passion to strike its root deeper into human nature, and materialized it to a lower point; and the sexual feeling from being an instinct, became a complex passion deep-seated in the mind, and closing it to the inward spiritual light. 
Thenceforth man required satisfaction of both these cravings from the woman, and she, degraded from the natural condition, had to adjust herself to the altered state. Man, whose vanity was only for the time gratified by the ownership of the woman, demanded constant humiliation on her part to feed its fire. One of the forms that this feeling took was the seemingly unselfish desire of man to save the woman from bodily weariness; but the true origin of this trait of man's character will be found, on reflection, to be his sexual tyranny. The reaction on women of this feeling produced, if possible, more disastrous results than on man. At the altar of his vanity she had to sacrifice truth and pretend an unwillingness to his embrace, when victory over no rivals ministered to that passion. She became weaker by the continuance of the tyranny which debarred her from strong physical exertion, and motherhood, which, as we have said, was perfectly painless in the beginning, became attended with suffering and even death. It must not be imagined that in those days the evils here mentioned had matured their growth, or attained anything like the rank proportions of the present day. Primitive people lived a simpler life; they knew but the germs of the evil which has developed to such frightful extent, and has become a blot on our civilization. Among the present inhabitants of the earth, those who have most preserved the simplicity of primitive times are freest from those poisonous effects of overindulgence which destroy the so-called civilized life. 
The "fall into generation" separated man more widely from the nature-spirits whom it was his duty to raise into humanity, and intensified their hostility toward him. The effect of this hostility upon the woman was more calamitous than upon the man, on account of her greater weakness, especially at the times of her trial and suffering. 

 
The attentive student of the rites, ceremonies, and religious superstitions prevalent among different nations, will note the universality of the belief that the woman with child is more in need of protection against evil influences than any other. Woman thus lost the position she once held, and in the subsequent history of the world her condition has never improved, the vantage-ground lost by her in the beginning has never been recovered, and never will be until man's spiritual nature reasserts itself and successfully overthrows his material inclinations. There can be no complete redemption for woman until this hour arrives and a school of philosophy, demanding no other sacrifice than that of self to soul, effects a reform in the inner man by uniting itself with the most practical careers and callings; till then the door will remain closed through which alone woman can be ushered into freedom. Her liberation does not depend upon laws and enactments any more than did her subjection in the first instance. 
All systems of ecclesiasticism, the monstrous offspring of the selfishness of man and his religious instinct, have denied women spiritual equity; the injustice of the sex reached its culmination in the enthronement of a personal God, with a Son to share His glory, but wifeless, motherless and daughterless. The materiality of man is nowhere so emphatically expressed as in his conception of a Supreme Father. He has eliminated from his ideal God all the attributes of woman; in his miraculously begotten Son alone are to be found some of the finer elements of womanhood. Although the Mohammedan religion is the only one which has expressly refused immortality to women, yet all the modern religions, in their ideal heaven which is to be reward of a holy life, have very seldom even an obscure corner for her; she must unsex herself before she can enter into the kingdom of heaven. 
The accepted theory of the relation between the sexes has, for the Christian world, been based upon the teachings of St.Paul; and as those teachings have been taken in a literal and not an occult sense, the greatest injustice has been done to the teacher and his teachings, and the saddest wrongs have resulted to the world. It is always easier for a man to believe that which fits in with his own preconceived ideas than to accept with equanimity what is opposed to his expectation, and the slavery imposed by custom upon woman was his precedent in this instance. 
True, the Jewish prophet taught his people that it was not good for man to be alone, but the mysticisms of the Kabala have been materialized to suit so many needs and occasions, that it is not easy to trust to the written word of today; the real significance of the admonition is wholly incomprehensible to the world 
at large. Materialism has sealed from view the doctrines of the Kabala, and what remains for the practical uses of religious teachers are only such simple truths as those which, by reason of their simplicity, cannot be distorted to suit various interpretations. 
The subject of woman, as connected with Aryan life, has so much practical importance, even at this late day, as to call for consideration at some length here. The position of womankind in the East has bee a never-ending theme for lamentation; but without being guilty of the absurdity of upholding that position as perfect, a remark may be ventured that the legal status of the Hindu and Mohammedan women is equal if not superior, to that of their Christian sisters, and curiously enough, the Mohammedan law is the most liberal in this respect, despite the fact that the Koran robs a woman of her soul. This is, perhaps, a grim irony, showing the inefficacy of legislative enactment, when not supported by the prevailing moral standard. Whatever the position of the Hindu woman of the present day may be, it is certain that there was a time, of which some record is preserved in the Sama-Veda, when spiritually or otherwise there was no difference made by the Aryans between the sexes. Merit, says a Sanscrit poet, is to be respected in the meritorious, and not age or sex. Salic law, both political and spiritual, was the growth of a minor cycle 

 
of descent which overwhelmed mankind with barbarism. 
During the period of Aryan history we have referred to, the woman was entitled to the Brahmanical thread as a mark of equality with her brother; she had the right to study and teach the Vedas, both of which privileges she has since been deprived of, and degraded to the level of a low-born Sudra,. It was optional with women in those days, and even at a much later period, to marry or choose a life of celibacy; and even marriage very frequently meant nothing more than a spiritual companionship, a kind of union which was not entirely unknown during the Middle Ages in Europe. Mention is, no doubt, to be found in the Brahmanical writings of the wives of the ancient sages. But it is erroneous to take the statements literally and conclude that a married life is compatible with spiritual development, the fact being that in many cases the wives mentioned were merely pupils, not necessarily of the female sex. Some light will be thrown on the subject when we consider what Solomon means by the "nuptial compact" between him and his God. The allegory of Krishna having married sixteen hundred damsels carried away from King Naraka (hell) will also be intelligible when rightly read. In the larger class of cases, the wives were in reality female disciples, of whom the number was not restricted, and hence the erroneous charge of polygamy sometimes brought against the ancient adepts of India. A notable instance of spiritual union of this kind occurs in the Brihad Aranyaka Upanishad, where the sage Yaguavalkya instructs his two wives, Gargi and Maitreyi, on the nature of Nirvana and other sacred mysteries. It is to be remarked, by the way, that although Yagnavalkya is said to have had two wives, no mention is to be found of his children. The esoteric teachers know that not only was Yagnavalkya an adept himself, but so were his two wife-pupils. The great prevalence of celibacy during the period of India's spiritual growth is shown by the famous legislator Manu having laid down a positive injunction for Brahmans to marry and beget a child - in later times two children - before adopting the religious life; it was considered no violation of the marital duty to sever the marriage bond, but not necessarily spiritual companionship, on the birth of the child. Among the superior castes the term of a man's life was divided into three parts; the first twenty-five years to be devoted to study, the next twenty-five to worldly work, and the rest of the life to the pursuit of spiritual knowledge in retirement. 
In later ages, when material progress rendered these regulations obsolete, and the marriage bond more lasting, marital rights and duties were founded upon strictly scientific principles. Social and religious regulations were framed with a view of protecting married life from sensual excesses, and securing a certain independence to woman from sexual tyranny. So long as the popular mind at all retained the high standard of spirituality the wife had the right to put an end to the marriage relation by adopting the religious life. Certain astronomical, astrological, and physiological considerations always governed the connubial rites. The great harm to sexual morality, resulting from the promiscuous association of men with women undergoing certain physiological changes,cannot be over-estimated. The infringement of the wise rule which separated women from all men, during this period, has not only blunted the moral sensibilities of men and women, but is a constant torture to all finer natures; and persons at all gifted with clairvoyant perceptions find the influences surrounding women during the period under notice particularly distressing. Even in the present day, the domestic life of the Hindus is so regulated that women in such a state are protected against influences sent out by men to which they are peculiarly susceptible. But mankind in general, ignorant of those subtle forces which govern its well-being, brings upon itself consequences which are as far-reaching as they are hurtful. 
The effects of temperance and vegetarianism on sensual propensities are well known, and a reference to India almanacs will show how food is to be regulated during the days on which a man is permitted sexual 

 
relations. An elaborate account of the inner married life of the Aryans is not in place here; it is enough to say that marriage was looked upon as a sacrament, for the ideal was that no man was to marry mainly with the desire of gratifying his sexual nature. And no marriage could be consummated until the man had satisfied his conscience that sexual instinct was not the influence which attracted him to his wife. We do not mean to say that these wise regulations are observed in their entirety in the present day, but the ideal is still preserved.The complicated motives governing society were not elements which entered into the social economy of those days, and considerations which have degraded marriage from a psychic union to the level of a civil contract were then unknown; hence marriage was a purer institution, offering fewer temptations for selfish wrong-doing and bartering in flesh. The apotheosis of the brute part of man's nature was reached when society unmasked itself, and made marriage dissolvable on either of the parties refusing to submit to sexual outrage. This is the culmination of materialism. People seem to forget that there can be as much immortality in the married state as outside of it, if not more. If a commission where issued by the civilized world to examine into married relations, the physical and moral evils produced by legalized immorality would be found to stagger belief. Let any experienced physician investigate the subject, and the disclosures would be humiliating to self-respecting men and women. The ephemeral process of courtship, which precedes modern marriages, even at its best, is but conventional; and is made to serve a purpose requiring deep scientific considerations for its proper attainment. Among the Brahmans in the earlier period, and to a large extent even in the present day, marriages were regulated by considerations which will be regarded as highly scientific by those who have any knowledge of the secret sciences, especially astrology. According to the physical and mental peculiarities which the position of the heavenly bodies at the time of birth indicates, men and women are divided into four classes, technically called "castes" - Brahman, Kshetriya, Vaisya, and Sudra, according as spiritual, martial, commercial, or servile idiosyncrasies predominate in them. From another point of view, a classification into three is made - deva, man and rakshasa - a man belonging to a superior caste could take a wife from the inferior castes, but not vice versa. Again, a Deva could marry a female belonging to the class Man; but not a male of the latter class a female of the former, nor could a marriage take place between the Rakshasa and either of the other two classes. There are many more rules founded upon astrological and other considerations of too technical a character to be entered into here. Chiromancy, a science of different bodily marks, also contributed to the determination of suitable matches. 
It is not compatible with the design of this book to give a detailed account of each step of retiring spirituality. With early man the animal passions were not sufficiently developed to produce great evils. In the first place, he was a healthy being, with all the functions working together harmoniously, producing no jar or friction; hence all propensities, generated by a diseased condition of the nerves were unknown to him. The effect of fresh air and proper food, and freedom from anxiety, upon the moral character is readily admitted. The happy, free existence of early man, enabling him to derive enjoyment from everything around, left no room for the growth of that wearisomeness which lies at the bottom of all artificial cravings and misuse. But when the conditions of life began to change, and man, no longer the simple child of nature, began to develop new circumstances by the exercise of his personal will, excesses resulted. By slow degrees he was obliged to find artificial habitations; and the grouping together of numbers, producing unhealthy mesmeric and atmospheric conditions, brought on injurious results, the immediate effect of which was over-population - the greatest curse that has fallen on humanity. The statesman and the economist will labour in vain for the removal of this evil until man's nature is purified and woman's is exalted.  
The subjection of woman and interference with her liberty of person and of conscience, are the principal causes which have sapped the foundations of existence, made the world a prison-house for humanity, 

 
and given to disease, want, and death, such sure hold of the race, that it has required man's entire strength and time to fight them, and has left him no leisure to confront the higher problems of being. The truth should be shown to all willing eyes, and man's awakened conscience trusted to work out his own salvation. To this end an attempt has been made herein to thrown some light on the sphere women ought properly to occupy; but the subject has by no means been exhausted: we hope, however, that enough has been said to lead to its thoughtful consideration. Increased practice of celibacy is the only means for any real advancement of the race; the celibacy which is not the result of restraint, but the outcome of a spiritual growth, producing deep conviction and general elevation of character. 
The commonest objection taken against celibacy is that if practised by all it will bring the world to an end; but this objection can only have importance with those who attach an exaggerated value to the present objective life. The termination of the world, by which is meant merely the end of the present transitory state of our consciousness,is by no means a very dreadful calamity. And again the objection is worthless because the apprehended danger, whatever its magnitude, would never occur; as there will always be found a sufficient number to carry on the work of perpetuating the race. There is one contention, however, which requires to be met: some urge it is only the noblest and most unselfish of men who will be moved by the highest instincts of their nature to adopt celibacy and thus leave the least worthy to propagate. Here it is to be pointed out, that this line of argument entirely ignores the dynamic power of thought, which the celibates will bring to bear upon those desirous of issue; and thus the general average of humanity, far from deteriorating, will be likely to improve. 
A man who in his own nature realizes the truth, and devotes himself to the mightier questions of life, is looked upon as a useless member of the human family, and is contemptuously ignored by the materialistic utilitarian. But the true worth of such a man is apparent to the spiritual mind; he is a hero among men and a benefactor of his race. The first step he has to take in order to enter upon his work, is to release himself from all physical bondage, and to establish, as the first law of his life, freedom from worldly ties. To him the saying "yet cannot serve God and Mammon" is the first and most important fact, and the second is the renunciation, one after another, of all the delusions with which life is overshadowed. Granting the largest liberty of action to all the world, he seeks for himself the inalienable right of every free spirit - the right to have no other gods than the one he serves, his own conscience. So long as a man is hampered by the indulgence of any weakness, and, above all, when he is guilty of subjugating another human being to sexual selfishness - so long will it be wholly impossible for him to advance his work and spread true wisdom. The chief source of error in all investigations of a spiritual nature in the past, has been due, not so much to the manner of investigating, as to the character of the investigators. 
The spiritual wisdom of the world has been the offering of celibates. 
The connection between celibacy and spiritual life is not very difficult to see. The married relation which accentuates the difference between man an woman is utterly incompatible with the higher life. Adeptship is the peculiar heritage of the celibate. "He", says the India proverb, "who desires offspring desires death; the immortal must be celibate". Those who are acquainted with what is called the evolution of the astral body know how sexual feeling devours that energy which alone can liberate the astral man from the physical encasement. What man has been, the same and much higher he will be again. Immaculate conception, which is accepted as a dogma by many religions, will certainly be the prevalent mode of reproduction when the higher races appear, races in which all men and women will "enlightened". This 

 
knowledge of spiritual reproduction is one of the highest secrets of Adeptship, but until its day arrives the duty of every spiritual-minded man and woman is to accelerate the advancement of the race by individual purity, which is the first step in the path which leads to Adeptship. The Adepts, in fact, represent to us today, not only the spiritual height from which the race descended, but also that other and much loftier height which it will attain. These exalted celibates, the products of no particular age or country, by constant endeavour keep alive the race ideal and possibilities; and the line along which the Adept transmits this knowledge is not hereditary succession, but spiritual propagation, by which the spirit of the Adept master infuses truths into the inner mind of the neophyte. 
Is it necessary to say more than this in support of the position assumed? The reader who asks for proofs need only recall the examples of all ages. Spiritual teachers, Pagans and Christians alike, were men free from relationships which, by reason of their injustice to women, were destructive of the highest development of the individual. Who among the prophets of Christianity had not first to free himself form family bondage before he entered upon his work: Who so great an advocate of celibacy as Paul? Who so tender and indulgent in his recognition of man's weakness and sensual nature as he who preached celibacy in these words: "And this I speak for your own profit; not that I cast a snare upon you, but for that which is comely, and that ye may attend upon the Lord without distraction?" [Corinthians vii, 35]  

 
CHAPTER VI 
THE FOURTH RACE - ATLANTEANS 
We have hitherto pursued the general evolution of the human race, and have not spoken about its different tribes and branches; but it has been stated that during each Ring seven difference races have their rise and fall on a planet. During the present Ring our earth has seen the predominance of four different races, the ruling race now being the fifth.It must not be imagined that one race has to completely die out before another steps into the arena of life, but the period during which any one race acquires supremacy is said to belong to that race. Geologically speaking, the present is the age of man, but that does not mean that fishes do not swim in our waters, reptiles crawl along our paths, and quadrupeds dwell in our forests. Although the fifth race is the predominant one, it must not be forgotten that the fourth, and even the third race, have yet their representatives living. Among the present habitants of the earth,the black or negroid branches are the earliest, and therefore the least important; next comes the red-yellow races; and the cream of the earth's population is the brown-white race. Popularly speaking, this race is the Aryan family of mankind, speaking languages the affinity of which for each other is now an established fact. 
In order to comprehend the progress of humanity through the different races, it is necessary to remember what large tracks of time are occupied by each of these races.Thus the present race had its origin more than a million years ago; it was preceded by the fourth and third races, each of which had its period of supremacy. Biblical chronology , and even geological calculations, will be offended by this statement, but it is supported by the experience of living adepts as well as by the sacred chronology of the ancients. If the temple records of ancient Egypt, of Chaldea, or of India be recovered for the modern world, we shall find how modern history and modern science have but picked up stray facts and pieced them together,without any knowledge of their position in time. Geology will hardly allow man any existence on this earth before the glacial period, but the esoteric teachers know that civilizations greater than that of Greece or Rome flourished before that epoch, and had their day. It would be a gigantic task to remove all the misconceptions that exist on the subject. We shall not waste time and energy by trying to fight the brood of error that infests the world, but shall state some events connected with the ancient history of our race, so far as permitted, and show their consistency with received facts. 
It is know to all occultists the the first civilization in the present Ring began with the third race, of which lingering remnants are now to be found among the flat-headed Australians, These degraded specimens of humanity, strange though it might seem, are descended from ancestors whose civilization antedated by aeons that of Phoenicia or Babylon. At first sight it may be very difficult to account for the continuance of the representatives of a high primeval civilization, which has left no traces that we can recognize. Students of the occult sciences know, however, that the end of the period of each race-supremacy is marked by a great cataclysm alternately of fire and water. If civilized Europe of today be visited by such a convulsion of Nature, its civilization will vanish; there are no pyramids which will remind its successors of its departed glory; and those among its population who escape, being deprived of all conditions of civilization life, will soon lapse into barbarism. Although civilization began with the third race,it must not be imagined that the second-race men were savages; since the conditions of their existence, it will be seen, were such as to render civilization or barbarism, as we know them, equally impossible. 
The earliest civilization of which unmistakable traces have come down to us belonged to the fourth race, 
 
the so-called Atlanteans. To this period belongs the civilization mentioned in such books as Popul Vuh, Uttara Ramayana, and others. In the celebrated Sanscrit epic of Valmiki we find copious accounts of the civilization of a race of Atlanteans who dwelt near the mainland of India. The material prosperity of this people was very much in advance of the Aryans of the time. Their knowledge of the secret resources of Nature was something wonderful; they knew how to navigate aerial vehicles with the help of the subtle agency which Bulwer Lytton refers to under the name of Vril. Their houses, like those of the ancient Peruvians, were floored with gold. The weapons of destruction they constantly used were so far superior to those known to us as to be hardly conceivable.Art, literature, and science had their origin during this race period; but the Aryans had to develop their own civilization before they came in contact with the Atlanteans. Very little of the literature of the Atlanteans is now preserved, and their art and science have scarcely left any vestige except in China. By their superior knowledge the fourth race developed a material civilization, the like of which has not yet been seen on this earth. Their vast literature has almost entirely disappeared from the world; though one of the principal astronomical works in Sanscrit, called the Surya Siddhanta Plakshadvipa , is the production of an Atlantean astronomer. In this book mention is made of the seven islands of Atlantis - Plashed and others - and their geographical position marked with scientific accuracy. Another celebrated astronomer, who is always alluded to as Asura Maya, was a native of Atlantis, although Professor Weber, entirely misapprehending the meaning of the first part of this name, tries to transform him into the Greek Ptolemaios. Asura was the generic appellation of all the Atlanteans, who were the enemies of the spiritual heroes of the Aryas (gods). This rough account of the Atlanteans refers to the period when they came into contact with the Aryans, and consequently were going down the cycle of their supremacy. The record of their grandeur before that period (and it must be remembered that the Atlanteans attained their highest pitch of civilization and progress long before the Aryans emerged out of their swaddling-clothes) is preserved in books inaccessible to the world at large, and treasured with zealous care in the secret libraries of temples and lamaseries and the crypts and caverns of the initiated mystics. 
It may be a matter of surprise to find them described in the Brahmanical writings as Rakshasas - a term signifying "raw-caters" - and their power of smell credited with wonderful acuteness; but the solution of the difficulty is to be found in the order of the development of the senses in the different races and sub races. Ours being the fifth race has developed the sense of taste more than any preceding, while the sense of small attained its greatest perfection in the fourth race. 
The occult records shows that a considerable part of India was, at the time of the Aryan settlement, in the occupation of the Atlanteans; so also parts of Europe, specially Greece and Italy, not to mention their African colonies in Egypt and on the Mediterranean coast. Regarding the Atlantean ancestors of the Greeks and Romans, one of our teachers says: - 
"The Atlantean 'old Greeks' could not be designated even as the Autochtones - a convenient term used to dispose of the origin of any people whose ancestry cannot be traced, and which, at any rate with the Hellenes, meant certainly more than simply 'soil-born', or primitive aborigines; and yet the so-called fable of Deukalion and Pyrrha is surely no more incredible or marvellous than that of Adam and Eve - a fable that hardly a hundred years ago no one would have dared or even thought to question. And in its esoteric significance,the Greek tradition is possibly more truly historical than many a so-called historical event during the period of the Olympiades, though both Hesiod and Homer may have failed to record the former in their epics". 

 
"Peradventure", says the same teacher, [Theosophist, October 1883] "had the historians learned something more than they have of the Italian 'Autochtones' - the Iapygians - one might have given the 'old Romans' the latter name. But then there would be again that other historical difficulty: history knows that the Latin invaders drove before them and finally cooped up this mysterious and miserable race among the clefts of the Calabrian, thus showing the absence of any race affinity between the two. Moreover, Western archeologists keep to their own counsel, and will accept of no other but their own conjectures; and they have failed to make anything out of their undecipherable inscription in an unknown tongue and mysterious characters on the Iapygians monuments, and so for years have pronounced them unguessable .... The records of the occultists make no difference between the Atlantean ancestors of the old Greeks and Romans. Partially corroborated, and in turn contradicted, by licensed or recognized history, their records teach that of the ancient Latini of classic legend called Itali - of that people, in short, which, crossing the Apennines (as their Indo-Aryan brothers - let this be known - had crossed before them the Hindoo-Koosh), entered from the north the peninsula - there survived at a period long before the days of Romulas but the name and - a nascent language. Profane history informs us that the Latins of the 'mythical era' got so Hellenized amidst the rich colonies of Magna Graecia, that there remained nothing in them of their primitive Latin nationality. It is the Latins proper, it says, those pre-Roman Italians, who, by settling in Latium, had from the first kept themselves free from the Greek influence, who were the ancestors of the Romans. Contradicting exoteric history, the occult records affirm that if, owing to circumstances too long and complicated to be related here, the settlers of Latium preserved their primitive nationality a little longer than their brothers who had first entered the peninsula with them after leaving the East (which was not their original home), they lost it very soon, for other reasons. Freed from the Samuites during the first period, they did not remain free from invaders. While the Western historian puts together the mutilated, incomplete records of various nations and peoples, and makes them into a clever mosaic according to the best and most profitable plan, and rejects entirely traditional fables, the occultist pays not the slightest attention to the vain self-glorification of alleged conquerors or their lithic inscriptions. .... The occultist follows the ethnological affinities and their divergences in the various nationalities, races, and sub-races in a more easy way; and he is guided in this as surely as the student who examines a geographical map. As the latter can easily trace by their differently coloured outlines the boundaries of the many countries and their possessions, their geographical superficies, and their separation by seas, rivers, and mountains, so the occultist can,by following the (to him) well distinguishable and defined auric shades and gradations of colour in the inner man, unerringly pronounce to which of the seven distinct human families, as also to what particular respective group, and even small sub-group, of the latter belongs such or another people, tribe, or man. This will appear hazy and incomprehensible to the many who know nothing of ethnic varieties of nerve-aura, and disbelieve in any 'inner-man' theory, scientific but to the few. The whole question hangs upon the reality or unreality of the existence of this inner-man whom clairvoyance has discovered, and whose odyle or nerve emanations Von Reichenbach proves. It one admits such a presence and realizes intuitively that, being closer related to the invisible Reality, the inner type must be still more pronounced than the outer physical type, then it will be a matter of little, if any, difficulty to conceive our meaning. For, indeed, if even the respective physical idiosyncrasies and special characteristics of any given person make his nationality usually distinguishable by the physical eye of the ordinary observer, let alone the experienced ethnologist - the Englishman being commonly recognizable at a glance from the Frenchman, the German from the Italian, not to speak of the typical differences between human root-families in their anthropological division - there seems little difficulty in conceiving that the same, though far more pronounced, difference of type and characteristic, should exist between the inner races that inhabit these 'fleshly tabernacles'. Besides this easily discernible psychological and astral differentiation, there are the documentary records in their unbroken series of chronological tables, and the history of the gradual branching off of races and sub races from the three geological, primeval Races, the work of the Initiates of all the archaic and ancient temples up to date, collected in our 'Book of Numbers', and other volumes". 

 
The divisions of the human race referred to above by the term "root-families" are, more properly speaking geological races. Teachers of the esoteric doctrine know that the earth at the present time is inhabited by 'Three entirely distinct primeval races, whose evolution, formation, and development have proceeded pari passu and on parallel lines with the evolution, formation, and development of three geological strata; namely, the Black, the Red-Yellow, the and the Brown-White Races". 
Even the sacred writings of the Hindus, accessible to the world, reveal to us many glimpses of the Eastern Atlanteans. During the first period of Aryan settlement in India, the new-comers had constant warfare with the Atlanteans whom they found in possession. At a much later epoch, of which a pretty full account is to be found in the Ramayana, the Atlanteans were scattered far and wide over the face of the country. Incursions by them on the Aryan settlements were few and far between, and it was only in the less populous tracts that the Aryan heroes had to encounter, with almost invariable success, the straggling Atlantean tribes. But there was a very powerful Atlantean empire extending over a number of islands in the Indian seas, and its Emperor Ravana, in spite of many symbolical legends clustering around him, was an historical character to whom many of the Aryan principalities on the mainland were forced to pay tribute. The marvellous powers he obtained over the occult forces are allegorically described in that celebrated India epic. The sub-version of his empire by Rama, the Aryan hero, marked the extinction of Atlantean supremacy in that part of the world, although, here and there, rich and powerful Atlantean colonies struggled for existence for a very long time. At the battle of Kurukshetra, which according to the Brahmanical calculation took place over 5,000 years ago, Aryan princes fought side by side with their Atlantean allies. Before that date Udhisthira, the leader of one of the belligerent parties, had his palace, which was unsurpassed in its splendour by that of any other Aryan prince, built and furnished by an Atlantean of the name of Maya, who had inherited some of the transcendental knowledge of his race. 
We have said that the Atlanteans possessed full knowledge of some of the subtler forces of Nature now generally unknown to the sons of men. It was with the assistance of this knowledge that they carried forward their development to a point which it is difficult for the ordinary man of today to imagine; and it was the abuse of this knowledge that led to their downfall and extinction as a dominant race. The Adepts of our day have all the knowledge of the Atlanteans, and much more, but their highly developed moral nature is always a safeguard against the abuse of power. Those familiar with the method of instruction pursued by them, know how careful they are never to entrust occult knowledge to persons of whose moral integrity and purity of motive they are not absolutely certain. The profane public regard the science of the occult forces of Nature as magical, as a thing which, if true, is of little practical importance. They do not for a moment realize to what purposes of benevolence and malignity this science is applied according to the moral character of the practitioners. The so-called magic, as Bulwer Lytton points out in this"Strange Story', is of two kinds;- 
"The dark and evil, appertaining to witchcraft or necromancy; the pure and beneficent, which is but philosophy, applied to certain mysteries in Nature remote from the beaten tracks of science, but which deepened the wisdom of ancient sages, and can yet unriddle the myths of departed races". 
Although some of the occult forces of Nature may be known and wielded by persons of low and selfish moral character, the highest mysteries will always be reserved for the pure and the unselfish. We need not discuss here the ultimate effect brought on the devotees of black magic, by their own wicked practices. The tortures of a theological hell are nothing in comparison to the punishment which the 

 
immutable law brings upon the sons of evil. The great cataclysms which close the cyclic degeneration of races, are brought about when the increase of these spiritually debased black magicians renders a general conflict between them and the Adepts of the Good Law inevitable; the struggle continues until the periodic cataclysm sweeps away the doomed race, and prepares the ground for the growth and prosperity of the succeeding one. In all religions the memory of such conflicts is preserved under different names and symbols. This is the combat of Michael and his angels against the Dragon; of the Sons of Light against the Sons of Darkness; of the Devas against the Asuras. The last of such great conflicts was followed by the submergence of the last mainland of Atlantis. "The great event", says our Master, "the triumph of our sons of the fire-mist (the adepts), the inhabitants of Shambullah, when yet an island in the Central Asian sea - over the selfish, if not entirely wicked magians of Poseidonis (the last of the Atlantean continents), occurred just 11,446 years ago."[1881[ 
It must here be mentioned that the adepts who overthrew the power of these black magicians were not all of the fifth race, but many fourth-race men, raised by artificial spiritual culture to the standard of the fifth-race adepts, were found on the victorious side in the great conflict. Ages after this even, which but 
robbed black magicians of predominance and not of existence, we find Atlantean black magicians at times interfering with the progress and development of students of the real occult science. The school of black magic is by no means extinct even today; in fact,numerically speaking, the black magicians are stronger than the followers of Light; and the mystic, from the commencement of his career, feels the malignant influence of these powers of evil. In the great Sanscrit epic of the Mahabharata, we read of a terrible fight between Anusalva, the king of the black magicians of North-Eastern Bengal, a country famous to this day for sorcery and witchcraft, and Krishna and his clan, to the utter discomfiture of the former. About the time of the fall of Buddhism in India,the headquarters of the Indian black magicians were in Malwa in Rajputana. At present there are two principal schools of black magic in the East: the chief seats of one are in and near Cashmere; and of the other, in Bhootan and further East. The black magicians go under various names; their rites and practices are horrible and revolting to a degree, and by them they can invoke the aid of some of the worst principles in Nature - dangerous elementaries, and still more vile and dangerous elementals. The power thus gained is used for the purpose of punishing their enemies or otherwise gratifying their own evil ends. They are on the look-out to injure men, and it often occurs that a person making a good resolution is by them malignantly thwarted in his purpose. The great difference between the adepts and the black magicians is that that the power of the latter can be set in motion only by the force of a concentrated selfishness. They have accentuated their personality (the fifth Principle) by sacrificing to it their spirituality, which is the sixth Principle, the divine spark in man; and in consequence, when the personality fades, as it must when in course of time all Nature is spiritualized, they will meet with the fate of Margrave in the "Strange Story"; they will lose all, and, turning round, have to begin again from the lowest rung of the ladder. This is the eternal damnation of the wicked; the annihilation spoken of in treatises on occultism. It does not mean an absolute negation, but a loss of all the memories that cluster around an individuality from the beginning of its cyclic course; all individualities as such are immortal. 
In "Isis Unveiled" the subject of Atlantis has been considered at some length, and a valuable addition made to our stock of knowledge. An old Eastern legend is therein narrated: - There was an island in an extensive sea where now the Gobi desert lies. It was inhabited by band of adepts, the "Sons of God", called Brahman Pitris in Indian sacred books, and in the Chaldean Kabala by another though synonymous term; their island formed a part of the lost continent of Atlantis. 

 
"This race [of adepts]", to quote this authority, "could live with equal ease in water, air, or fire, for it had an unlimited control over the elements. .... It was they [these adepts] who imparted Nature's most weird secrets to men, and revealed to them the ineffable and now lost 'word' ... There was no communication with the fair island by sea, but subterranean passages, known only to the chiefs, communicated with it in all directions". 
Following it up, a different authority says that "Atlantis is mentioned in the 'Secret Books of the East' (as yet virgin of Western spoliating hand) under another name in the sacred hieratic or sacerdotal language. And then it will be shown that Atlantis was not merely the name of one island, but that of a whole continent, of whose isles and islets many have to this day survived. The remotest ancestors of some of the inhabitants of the now miserable fishermen's hovel 'Aclo' (once Atlan) , near the Gulf of Uraha, were allied at one time as closely with the old Greeks and Romans as they were with the fourth-race Chinese". 
