
CHAPTER VII 
EARLY ARYANS 
Each race develops one of the seven principles of man within the limits of the Ring. The fourth race based its civilization upon the development of the fourth principle, physical desire and all its endeavours had for their object the gratification of the sensual nature. Our fifth race will not have run its course without evolving a civilization in which all the intellectual faculties (the fifth principle in man) will attain their highest development in this Ring. The sixth race will be highly spiritual, and before its close all human beings will attain "enlightenment". The perfection of the seventh-race men is simply inconceivable to us, for among their adepts will abide a planetary spirit. 
The civilization of the Aryans was an entirely different evolution from the one which preceded it. The Aryans did not come in contact with the Atlanteans until after they had developed a civilization of their own to a very considerable degree. It is proposed in this chapter to put together a few facts connected with the origin and infancy of this civilization, which, though subsequently a great deal influenced by the fourth race, had to grow by its own inherent vitality until the Aryan people were dispersed in different directions.  
The filth Race has already evolved five sub-races; the first being the Indian Aryans, and the last the principal European peoples. In the evolutionary progress of a human being he has to pass, generally speaking,through all the races and sub-races during the Ring, but there are exceptions which, though comparatively few, are absolutely numerous. It is not necessary, for instance, that a Brahman should incarnate himself as a European to complete his progress, if he should be able to develop in himself all the peculiar excellences of the European without such incarnation. As a matter of fact,within the limits of the same race, an individual by his own exertions may govern his incarnations without being an adept, who, of course, is the master of his future within limits which need not here be discussed. The Aryans being the fifth race of the present Ring, it is clear that they occupy a very important position in the chain of races, of which the first three prepared the ground for the appearance of more perfect types. The fourth race marked the turning-point from the period of ignorant innocence to that of responsible knowledge, for when humanity shall have passed through its present cycle of material progress it will reach a height of perfection which it has never before attained. The fifth race, succeeding, as it does, the fourth, the turning-point, will, before its course is run, show a positive advance of mankind, by uniting material and spiritual excellence to a very remarkable degree; an advance of which the first glimpse was given in the civilization of the Indian Aryans. But when the tide of evolution begins to ascend the cycle, much higher peaks of perfection, better fitted to resist the influence of time, will be scaled. No race of people which has existed on our planet possessed for us so great an importance as the earliest of the Aryan family. 
Indo-Aryan civilization was in a way unique. The India Aryans attained a high standard of material development while retaining a large share of the spiritual consciousness of their ancestors,the third race. They combined the material civilization of the Atlanteans with the higher spirituality of the preceding period. 
The cradle of the early Aryan race was Central Asia [from whence they dispersed and overran different 
 
parts of the globe. It is from this dispersion that the true history of the Aryan race dates, for then began its large growth, its greater development its progress in arts and industries,which we mistakenly suppose are new to our day and evolved by our needs. But this breaking-up of the ancestral life-habits, which led to the greatest prosperity of the race, ultimately resulted in its ruin, or rather its cyclic obscuration. What led to the dispersion of the Aryan people and the breaking-up of their ancestral home? 
The immediate cause was over-production, for when the pressure became great the people began to separate and to seek new homes, and finally this once united people ultimately scattered themselves over the face of the earth. This division and dispersion brought about what was not known among the Aryans in previous ages, the shedding of a fellow-creature's blood, and people who were originally one, 
having grown aliens and strangers, engaged in resisting mutual encroachments. The progress of these events was accelerated by the undeveloped state of the faculty of memory in the earlier times. Once out of the ancestral home, a tribe knew its brothers no more.The multiplicity of wants produced by this change brought about discontent and dissatisfaction. The separation from the happy home of their youth caused the first note of woe to be sounded by the wandering tribes in the midst of their long and wearisome marches. Those who settled in colder climes made demands upon those who stayed in Central Asia; while those who emigrated into the torrid zones fell victims to disease, and first experienced sorrow from the untimely death of friends; then, with the appearance of poverty the "Golden Age" came to an end. 
Strange as it might seem, this separation and dispersion of the people gave rise to the music and poetry of our race. These arts first appeared amongst that branch of the Aryan race which wandered northwards. Their great longing for home stirred their souls to the utmost depths, and poured itself forth in rude, archaic minstrelsy. The growth of music and and poetry was assisted by war, which followed in the track of the dispersion of the race and necessitated rallying cries during battle. 
The influence of this change of surroundings was not less marked on religion. Music and poetry gave quite a new colouring to the expression of spiritual thought. The higher perceptions of man had been blunted, and ordinarily he could grasp things spiritual only with the help of his imagination. This circumstance rendered poetry the fitting vehicle of religious feeling; by the alliance poetry gained, and religion lost a great deal in spirituality. At the period we are dealing with, ideas, like men, began to be clothed; and metaphor, to the ancient people a reality and not a mere figure of speech, became the language of daily life. 
Before leaving this part of the subject we must guard against an erroneous impression that might otherwise be formed. It must not be supposed that the above account is chronological; that the retrogression of the Aryans began immediately after the dispersion of the early Aryan people. It was necessary to anticipate some facts connected with that event, to render the picture a little more complete. In reality a period of great prosperity and glory intervened between the break-up of the ancestral home of the early Aryans and their final decline. Of the various branches of the Aryan race it is not our purpose to speak here, but only of that larger and more important family which made the glory of India, and whose representatives still people that country. The early India settlers were the flower of the Aryan race; they reached a pitch of civilization which has not been equalled, and of whose true greatness the first glimpses are but just bursting upon the world. These Aryans were the embodiment of the highest development recorded on this planet. And when all the proof on this point is given to the world, the true significance of the philosophy dimly outlined by the custodians of Ancient Wisdom under the guise of Theosophy will be properly apprehended. 
The Indo-Aryans had condensed to a remarkable degree the knowledge achieved by their predecessors, and evolved for themselves many truths ignored today save by the few who are in advance of this cycle and are crying aloud in the wilderness the old, old message to a heedless and distrustful world. They were intuitive at first rather than intellectual; and not until the growth of the latter faculty had almost superseded the former were they materialized to the extent of feeling distrust in their own higher nature. 
Even in its early periods Aryan life was mostly pastoral; it is erroneous to conclude that our early ancestors lived by hunting. They were not what we may term a hardy people, for they had not the inclinations which conduce to develop hardihood. They were wanting in what we nineteeth-century people call aggressive energy. Physically the Aryan of the period with which we are dealing was superior to his present representative. His body was free from disease, and not subject to untimely death; while the natural term of his life was a great deal longer than it is now. The complexion of the early Indian Aryans was not like that of the present generation of Hindus - various shades of brown - almost pure white, with slight tinge of gold. Taken altogether, the epoch which witnessed their rise and development will stand for all ages as the most remarkable era known in the history of the world. 
It is noteworthy how little of the history of this wonderful people should be generally known. The question is surrounded by obscurity, and but for the presence of the English in India, long periods, and perhaps ages, might have elapsed before the West recognized the gems of wisdom they have left behind. The revival of learning now beginning in India is due in the main to the influence of England. 
The contact with a liberal foreign thought introduced into India has resulted in rousing among its people a more profound and more thoughtful interest in the ancient literature of their country. The first question asked by the foreign investigator of India's condition was, "What is your record? who were your ancestors?" The bewildered people looked around in amazement for some fitting proof to show that they were the unworthy descendants of mighty forefathers. 
But time is a healer as well as an avenger. The neglect which has followed the degeneration of this people, though long-continued and well-nigh hopeless, is to be atoned for before long. A spirit of inquiry has been infused into a people who have too long submitted to the domination of superstition and priestcraft. 
The revival has begun; a new light, so small and distant to the eyes now, is bursting upon the Eastern sky. Under the benign influence of a philosophy which embodies in it the very soul of Truth, there will be a Renaissance of this great and never-to-be forgotten people. Soon all India will be Aryan in thought and life; so mighty will this revival be, that the most distant lands will echo the awakening shout.The interest excited in the Aryan people of the East and their literature is in no danger of dying. The intermixture of European with Eastern thought will keep the flame alive, and the presence of the English in India will steadily add to its splendour. 

 
CHAPTER VIII 
GROWTH OF LANGUAGE AND RELIGION 
Nothing has been said in the previous chapters on the subject of the growth of language. As the careful reader might have already found out, the first seeds of language were sown in the fifth sub-race of the first race, when the sense of taste appeared. The acquisition by man of the organ of taste rendered the evolution of language a possibility; and in combination with the sense of hearing the last-named faculty led to the birth of speech. So long as the spiritual power of thought transference was retained, no want was felt of any other mode of communication between men; but the increasing grossness of the human 
body soon imposed upon man the necessity of finding some other method. His first attempt in this direction was the imitation of the sounds of birds and animals. This, no doubt, will be considered heretical by some schools of modern philologists who so violently deny what they call the "bow-wow" theory of language. These philosophers contend that language is coeval with reason, and in support of their views, refer, among other things, to the Greek word logos, which means both reason and speech. But it must be remembered, that language, like everything else, proceeds in cycles. Philology, no more than history, has been able to look beyond a certain segment of one of these cycles; hence has arisen a vast amount of misconception regarding the origin of the primitive man as well as all his belongings, language included. Max Müller thinks it impossible to proceed in the stratification of human history lower than the period of Aryan dispersion. Seeing how many race-waves had preceded that event, of which little or no trace is left for the ordinary eye, it is not difficult to attach its proper value to his speculations on the origin of language. No wonder that his investigations do not lead him to a state of human development where reason was unaccompanied by speech, because his method is such as to exclude examination of the state where language did not exist. The speech, which is the synonym of reason, is not the language which philologists study. The Greek logos and its Sanscrit equivalent, Vach, have a deeply mystical significance. Vach is called by a Sanscrit poet, "the immortal ray of the spirit". It is the first manifestation of the great unmanifested reality in the universe of phenomena. This is the mystical Christ of the Gnostics - the manifested Logos. Vach is the negative aspect of Savda Brahma, the first flutter of the Cosmic Will after its great night of rest. In the symbology of the Hindus, this Vach represented as the Goddess Saravati, who is also known as Devasena. Her husband is the eternal celibate, Kumara. It is enough here to say, without entering into a discussion of the endless correlations of spiritual forces, that the mystical Vach is not at all what we should call language. The progressive materialization which we have already referred to, is responsible for such confusion. 
The earliest language of which knowledge is attainable by any but the Initiates, is that spoken by the Atlanteans. A dialect is mentioned by Sanscrit philologists, under the name of Rakshasi Bhasa, the Atlantean tongue; but it must not be supposed that the form in which it is preserved in later Sanscrit was current among the Atlanteans with whom the Eastern Aryans came into contact. The same process of assimilation which has converted Buthair's mere into Buttermere was in full operation before the known Rakshasi dialect was formed. 
Sanscrit is, of all known languages, the nearest to the hypothetical original Aryan speech. 
But, as the very name of the "reformed" tongue implies, it is the cultivated dialect developed out of a pre existing one. Of this original language, little or no knowledge now exists. It is referred to in Sanscrit as the Devabhasa - a term, wrongly applied to Sanscrit itself in succeeding ages. The initiated alone have the 

 
key to this mother-tongue of all later languages, and in all the hieratic writings this language is always employed. Among the adepts in Thibet, this secret language, original source of Aryan speech, is known as the Zansar. The sacred language of the Zoroastrians is called Zend, after its parent the Zansar. 
In the elaborate ritual of ancient ceremonial magic, the incantations used were always couched in this mysterious Zansar language, which in these days is intelligible only to the Initiates, who in all countries and in all ages of this race, whether in Chaldea, Egypt, or India, have used no other for esoteric purposes. 
It would be unpardonable in the scientific opinions to imply any belief in the efficacy of spells and incantations, but truth compels us to remark how, to a properly trained mystic, they may be the means of controlling some of the subtler forces of Nature. No doubt it would be wrong to suppose that, if the words of an incantation were known to an ordinary person, he would be able to employ them for any purpose, good or bad, since their potency depends more upon the rhythmic enunciation and intonation than upon the words themselves. We all know how the same words produce different effects on the hearer according to the tone in which they are set. It would not be possible to convey a correct idea of the rationale of incantations, as it lies on a plane of existence with which we are not ordinarily familiar. But some light will be thrown upon the subject by a consideration of the physiological effect of the mystic syllable om. This word, when properly pronounced, produces a certain regulation of the breathing process. No other syllable takes a longer time or taxes the vocal organs more for its enunciation. The interdependence of the mental state and that of breathing is not difficult to perceive; and it is not making a violent statement to assert that a constant repetition of this word has the effect of tranquillizing the mind, and thereby restraining the force of the passions. In incantations, sound is so modulated as to produce the same state of the body as that which invariably accompanies the generation of any desired psychic or spiritual force. A single word mispronounced, or a single accent misplaced, will destroy the whole effect, or probably produce effects the opposite of those intended. The popular superstition that the bungling magician is carried away by the jeering devil has its origin in this fact. The Vedas contain in them many invocations and hymns which no un-initiated Brahman can recite, and it is only the Initiate who knows their true properties and how to put them into use. Some of the hymns of the Rig-Veda, when anagrammatically arranged, will yield all the secret invocations which were used for magical purposes in the Brâhmanical ceremonies. In the present day, there is a mass of Sanscrit writings called Mantra Sastra, or treatises on incantations; but these are later fabrications, which deluded, and still delude, the selfish aspirant for occult knowledge and power. The Atharva-Veda is a collection of all the principal invocations used by the Brahmans, but the initiated alone posses the true key to it. To the ordinary reader this collection is no better than, in the words of Max Müller, "theological twaddle". 
The black magicians, too, have their peculiar formulae of ritual or spells. Scarcely any of their hellish rites is complete without some frightful incantation. If an ordinary mortal were to recite the collocation of sounds they employ, it would be sure to excite feelings of disgust and horror. The distorted face of the black magician, while repeating his incantations, is terrible to behold. Most of these incantations end with the syllable ha. This syllable, when pronounced with a peculiar jerk, will always unpleasantly affect sensitive (not necessarily nervous) persons, for it is correlated with the destructive aspect of some subtle natural forces. The fact that the efficacy depends mainly upon the intonation and accent has been mentioned; indeed, it is not unusual for sorcerers to adopt some of the formulae of true religious rites, and with change of accent turn them to their own purposes. It is generally believed that when a spell is muttered backwards, its effect is reversed; the truth being, however, that the effect is not so much due to 

 
the arrangement of words, as to the sound produced, and its accompanying psychic disturbances. An instance may be taken. In all the Brahmanical ceremonies the mystic syllable om, which is the phonetic combination of the three letters a, u, m, plays an important part, but in the rituals of the Tantrikas, the syllables are arranged differently and made to yield the sound vam. Om represents the order of evolution; vam, that of involution; the one symbolizes conservation, and is therefore associated with Vishnu; the other, sacred to Siva, is the emblem of destruction. It is hardly necessary to note the effects which low, monotonous chanting produces, especially, on children and nervous people; so also music. Even animals and serpents are amenable to the influence of sound. It is not our purpose to give an elaborate account of the use of sound and language in magical ceremonies; enough has been said to give an idea of some of the forgotten uses of human speech. Language during its infancy was almost entirely dependent upon intonation. The separation of language and music belongs to a much later epoch, and an examination of the language of the surviving tribes of the Atlanteans will establish the point. The Chinese language, which, in spite of comparatively recent modifications, has not lost its distinctive character of dependence upon intonation, is a well-known instance. It is hardly necessary to mention that some of the inland tribes of China are of pure Atlantean descent - the maritime are hybrids. 
Religion as such had no existence before man developed language. Previous to that, when thoughts were so transparent as to be recognizable with the same ease with which we feel the difference of temperature; man lived in the truth embodied in the divine spark forming his true self. In these days religion has become a matter of sentiment; with the early people it was science; it was everything, governing all the affairs of life, great and small. We must not forget, however, that the religion known to the world as theirs was made up for them long after the time we now speak of. 
The last remnants of this all-embracing faith can still be discovered in India. The Hindu's religion is as indispensable to him as his daily bread. One of the profoundest remarks made by a foreigner about this branch of the Aryan race, now inhabiting India, is to the effect that the Hindu eats religiously, thinks religiously, and dies religiously. One of the principal causes which lead to such widespread misapprehension of the India people is the failure to recognize the living, all-pervading influence of their religion upon them. 
The iron conservatism of the Indian people has, in spite of all its manifold defects, had the merit of preserving the primitive spirit of religion comparatively pure. It is not surprising therefore to be told that a knowledge of the religion of the pre-Aryans must lead to all other knowledge regarding them. 
The religion of the ancient people was as simple as their lives. Time came when the mind of man distorted and elaborated the simple truth that their ancestors knew and adored. A gloomier picture than the progress of error which slowly covered man with its dark wings can hardly be drawn. Starting from the absolute truth, the spiritual monad plunged deeper and deeper into the mire of illusion; intoxicated with the wine of materiality, man more and more completely lost sight of his origin and destiny. 
The immediate spiritual ancestors of man, the planetary spirits, were "Sons of God" who sat near the throne of their father, and from his lips received instruction and did his sacred will. This no doubt is the metaphorical language of a later day. But there is more truth in it than the materialistic philosopher, who raises his hands in nervous horror at the very name of spirit, will be willing to admit, or the dogmatic theologian, materialist of a different order, will allow us to see. The great stream of ideation in the 

 
universal mind which results in the manifested Cosmos of beauty and love, while passing through the stage of planetary spirits, is yet unpolluted by the contact of so-called matter, the outer crust of being, the hem of the garments of truth. The transparent channel through which the vivifying energy flowed into those spirits rendered them conscious co-workers with Nature. They could always trace the thread of their life to its parent source, the great foundation of truth. For them the oracle had not yet spoken - "Know thyself;" self-knowledge was a portion of their being, as natural to them as sleeping is to us. They knew the truth, no doubt, but still they beheld not her naked splendour. The great Father (the Purusha of the Brahmans) even for them was hidden in the womb of the Eternal Virgin (Mulaprakriti). 
In one of the ancient Brahmanical books this is beautifully symbolized. The passage is rather lengthy, but its importance justifies our transcribing it here: - 
2. Brâhman appeared to them. But they did not know it, and said, "What sprite is this?" 3. They said to Agni(fire): "O Gataveda, find out what sprite this is." "Yes", he said. 4. He ran toward it, and Brahman said to him: "Who are you?" He replied: "I am Agni, I am Gataveda." 5. Brahman said: "What power is in you?" Agni replied: "I could burn all whatever there is on earth." 
6. Brahman put a straw before him saying: "Burn this." He went towards it with all his might, but he could not burn it. Then he returned thence, and said: "I could not find out what sprite that is."  
7. Then they said to Vayu (air): "O Vayu, find out what sprit this is." "Yes", he said. 8. He ran toward it, and Brahman said to him: "Who are you?" He replied: "I am Vayu, I am Matarisvan." 9. Brahman said: "What power is in you?" Vayu replied: "I could take up all whatever there is on earth." 
10. Brahman put a straw before him, saying: "Take it up." He went towards it with all his might, but he could not take it up. Then he returned thence, and said: "I could not find out what sprite this is." 
11. Then said to Indra: "O Maghavan, find out what sprit this is." He went towards it, but it disappeared from before him. 
12. Then in the same space he came towards a woman, highly adorned. It was Uma, the daughter of Himavat. He said to her: "Who is that sprite?" 

 
13. She replied: "It is Brahman." [Max Müller, "Sacred Books of the East", Volume i. pages 150 to 151.] 
This passage it may confidently stated, no European Orientalist has understood. Max Müller has here got into a hopeless maze of confusion. Having failed to unlock the casket, he rests satisfied with the jingling of the treasures within. 
The different orders of the planetary spirits (Dhyan Chohans of the Thibetan Occultists) are here represented by Agni, Vayu and Indra, the highest of them all. It is not for our profane hands to unveil the mysteries of planetary existence so dimly adumbrated under those mystic names. It will suffice for our purpose to say that the passage has reference to the amount of truth open to the eyes of the planetary spirits.The inferior ones are conscious of the presence of Brahman, the Universal Principle, the only Truth, but fail to know its nature. Indra, the greatest among them, perceives it at a distance, but finds its place occupied by Uma-Haimavati. This is deeply suggestive. Who is Haimavati? Max Müller makes a bold assertion about her. As will appear from the above extract, he translates the term as "Uma, the daughter of Himavat," and informs us in a foot-note:"Uma may be here taken as the wife of Siva, daughter of Himavat, better known by her earlier name Parvati, the daughter of the mountains." The special relationship between the wife of Siva and the Supreme Principle, Brahman, the untutored mind will seek in vain to discover. All initiated Brahmans know, however, that Uma, the daughter of the mountain, belongs to a later epoch, and has nothing to do with the present Uma called "Haimavati," a term which does not in this connection signify the daughter of the mountain Himavat. "Uma, " it is well known, means "Oh, don't!" and Haimavati is the "golden one." Uma is the Mulaprakriti, the great root of all, the real aspect of Brahman, and the ultima Thule of the real knowledge of even the Planetaries, the gods to whom she points out, the Eternal One-Life latent in her and unrealizable by them in its own nature. She is the "golden one," because gold is the invariable symbol of divine wisdom among all mystics, including the alchemists of Europe, and she is the highest object of the wisdom of the highest gods. To know the absolute consciousness, Brâhman, in all its aspects, the knower must become the known and cease to have any existence in the world of phenomena. 
The Aryans were the earliest inheritors of this divine knowledge, and have transmitted it, though more and more dimmed by the footprints of time, left upon it in its passage through the descending arc of the cycle, to their representatives of the present day. 
The religion of the early Aryans was very simple, we have said. It was simple because it was true, and Truth is always simple. The early Aryans, unlike their planetary progenitors, had to face the great problem "Know Thyself," but they solved it satisfactorily. The knew that the Great Manifested is but the representation of the Great Unmanifested. "Verily all that is, is Brahman" - as the ancient Brahman would say. The evolution that man has undergone since the time we are speaking of, renders this sentence not easily intelligible. It must not be imagined that the thing before us as such is Brahman, but that although it changes form incessantly it is Brahman when considered apart from the changes it is subject to: the capacity of change being an inherent property of the substance itself. This is what they knew about external Nature so called. It is quite beyond the scope of the present volume to expatiate upon the idea so vaguely shadowed forth above. Those who feel interested in it must betake themselves to the teachings of Vyasa and Sankara or Buddha, as expounded by their representatives, the Mahatmas of the East. 

 
Looking within themselves, the ancients found a something - the Self or Atma - which renders the existence of objects at all possible. This Atma they farther knew was Brahman, the universal self. When considered apart from phenomenal changes, the subject and object merge into each other and find rest in the permanent basis of all existence, Parabrahma. These were the broad features of the religious knowledge possessed by the primitive Aryans. We shall next see what bearing such knowledge had on their practical conduct. A careful consideration of a passage in the Isa Upanishad will throw a flood of light on the question: - " When thou hast surrendered all this, then thou mayest enjoy. Do not covet the wealth of any man." This translation by Max Müller, gives a fairly accurate description of what was natural to the early Aryans. Asceticism for its own sake is worse than useless, and it never touched the primitive people: greed of enjoyment is evil and hurtful, and they were never subject to it.The great beauty and grandeur of primitive life lay in its harmony with Nature: enjoyment was free from desire; conflict was unknown. 
As the veil of materiality thickened around man, he ceased to worship the divine in his own nature, and ended by worshipping external objects which represented and degrade his former ideals. When the perception of darkness dawned upon man he had no love for it. The first object he worshipped in the place of the Universal Cause, was the Sun which conquered Darkness, and with it came Usha or Eos, the Dawn, the golden hour of the day when all Nature was animated by the vivifying radiance of the returning Sun. To man twilight was also the time of worship and of peace which was shared by all animate and inanimate nature. The primitive people communed with the sun and sky, and had indeed an intense appreciation of Nature in all its forms; to them large trees and high mountains were as gods. Worship of the Sun-God, and hatred for the demon of Darkness, in fact, worship of natural phenomena generally, produced mental delusions, which, indulged in through long periods of time, became objective realities to the people of a later age, with whom we find, instead of mere disordered ideas, gross material objects which originally represented those ideas. The demoralization caused by this debating idolatry has been dwelt upon in a previous chapter. 

 
CHAPTER IX 
MAN AND OTHER ORDERS OF EXISTENCE 
We have had occasion several times to refer to the planetary spirits, the early instructors, and, in a sense,the progenitors of man. Of all the higher states of spiritual existence, that of the planetary spirits is nearest to man. The highest of these is what is called in the language of some mystics of India, Adi Buddha; it is the absolute reality underlying all existence, viewed as the sum total of all the spiritual energy and wisdom in the universe. It is synonymous with the Vedantic Prakriti or the Mula-Prakriti of the Sankhyas. Next in order of evolution comes the state of the Dhyani Buddhas, from which are evolved the celestial Bodhisatvas. The last of these states is that of planetary spirits, called by the Thibetan Buddhists, Dhyan Chohans. It is a common mistake to suppose that these different states are different beings, whereas each state contains within it innumerable individual beings. Just as the brain is the centre from which radiate numberless faculties, physical, intellectual, and aesthetic, so the different individuals producing their special effects on the universe form in their totality these states. It is not within the scope of this treatise even to outline the mysteries of higher spiritual existence; it will be enough to give here the broad features of the Dhyan Chohanic condition. 
The Dhyan Chohans are the guardian spirits of the different planets, and in a sense their architects. Strictly speaking, they are not creators, though often taken to be so; they do not bring into existence worlds out of nothing, but they fashion the nascent worlds in obedience to the immutable law of evolution; in other words, a portion of the Cosmic law acts through the conscious exertions of these exalted beings, of whom there are two distinct classes, the ascending and the descending Dhyan Chohans. It is to be remembered here that the course of nature is governed by alternate periods of rest and activity, usually known as cosmic days and nights. The chain of these alternations is an endless one, as no beginning of eternity is possible. The analogy obtains throughout the whole scheme of Nature, even to our daily work and nightly rest. It is clear that at all points in the period of Cosmic activity there must be some human beings who, having perfected themselves beyond the highest limit consistent with any given condition of life, for instance our own, must pass on to the Dhyan Chohanic condition. These are the ascending Dhyan Chohans; there are others who evolved out of the infinite womb of Prakriti are coursing towards the outermost limits of existence, and are therefore called the descending Dhyan Chohans. The former class, it is evident, have been men, or rather, corresponding beings of a previous period of Cosmic activity; the latter will be men or beings analogous to them. In the domain of eternal law no injustice is possible; each unit of existence must pass through the same wheel of being. Recent theosophical teachings have been charged with Nihilism. When the Universe reaches its consummation everything retires into Nirvana; from this, it is inferred, that there is no individual immortality, but even a cursory glance at the doctrine of the Dhyan Chohans will show the groundlessness of such an inference. If all human beings were annihilated as individuals, the ascending Dhyan Chohans, the advanced entities of previous great cycles, would have been an impossibility. 
During the first cycle of the existence of our planetary system a Dhyan Chohan has to be directly connected with the planet whereon the evolutionary tide is going to set in, and thereby give the necessary impulse to the development of human beings. The Dhyan Chohans are referred to in the India sacred writings by a variety of names. When incarnating himself on earth in the way mentioned above, the Dhyan Chohan is known as Manu-Svayambhu [self-existent]. He begets seven sons incorporeally, who are known as the seven Rishis, and are said to be his manasaputras, the children of the mind, or the fifth principle of the planet on which they appeared. All the adepts are the lineal spiritual descendants of 

 
these seven primeval sages. 
Here our Master says: "At the beginning of each Round, when humanity reappears under quite different conditions than those afforded for the birth of each new race and its sub-races, a 'planetary' has to mix with these primitive men, and to refresh their memories and reveal to them the the truths they knew during the preceding Round. Hence the confused traditions about Jehovah, Armazes, Osiris, and Brahma. But that happens only for the benefit of the first race. It is the duty of the latter to choose the fit recipients among its sons who are 'set apart' - to use a Biblical phrase - as the vessel to contain the whole stock of knowledge to be divided among the future races and generations until the close of that Round." Statements as to Rounds apply on a smaller scale to Rings. 
These seven Rishis are the first adepts of this planet and the prototype of all succeeding ones, each representing one of the seven classes of adeptship always existing on earth. Each of these types of adepts corresponds to one of these earthly Rishis, and also to one of the seven mysterious celestial. 
Rishis, "the seven spirits of God" of the Kabalist. When the hierarchy of adepts is well established, the planetary passes out of this sphere, but continues to overshadow the highest adept, his chosen successor, until the passage of humanity to the next sphere, where the elected sage conducts the nascent race and nurtures it as a planetary himself. During the present Ring the elected individuality has several times appeared among men, and founded the principal religions of the world. It was Gautama Buddha in one sense, but not in others. This, however, is a mystery which we are not permitted to reveal. 
According to the allegorical teaching of the Brahmans, these seven Rishis were the progenitors of the human race through the seven Pitris (literally, ancestors). They stand for the seven races to whom the esoteric truth is communicated by the adepts, the spiritual ancestors of the race. 
Again the Master says: "Every race had its adepts; so with every new race - we are allowed to give them out as much of our knowledge as the man of that race deserve. The last of the races will have its Buddha as every one of its predecessors had; but its adepts will be far higher than any of the present race, for among them will abide the future Planetary, the Dhyan Chohan, whose duty it will be instruct or refresh the memory of the first race of the fifth Round-men after this planet's future obscuration, or cycle of repose." 
The higher adepts of the present day can consciously communicate with the Dhyan Chohans of different grades, and thus derive knowledge about those mysteries of Nature which are beyond the range of their immediate consciousness. The Adityas, or the sons of Aditi, the Measureless [the Infinite Prakriti, or Nature], are the Dhyan Chohans, considered as the earlier progeny of Cosmic evolution. The Adityas, according to Hindu Scriptures, are twelve in number, and really signify the twelve grades of Dhyan Chohans. By Hindu, as well as Buddhist, writers they are also termed the Dikpalas, or the protectors of the different directions of the heavens. The Dhyan Chohans preside at the destruction of planets as well as assist at their birth. In view of this office they are called the twelve Rudras. This word, although translated by Max Müller as "the howlers," really signifies burning with anger. The appropriateness of this epithet will be seen when we remember that, according to the teaching of the adepts, our earth will be destroyed, when the naked splendour of the sun will pour down upon it, by the removal of the protecting chromosphere It is allegorically stated that twelve suns will shine in the heavens when our earth meets its destiny. 

 
Besides these highly spiritual super-human orders of being, various others exist in Nature. "There are races," says Bulwer Lytton, "in the magnitude of space, unseen as animalcules in the world of a drop. For the tribes of the drop, science has its microscope. Of the hosts of yon azure Infinite magic gains sight, and through them gains commend over fluid conductors that link all the parts of creation. Of these races, some are wholly indifferent to man; some benign to him; and some deadly hostile. In all the regular and prescribed conditions of mortal being, this magic realm seems as blank and tenantless as yon vacant air." 
To the ordinary man, the occupants of the "space unseen" are unknown until death introduces him to them. Until the doors of his spirit are opened through this change in his constitution, he has little or no conception of their existence. But there are exceptions to the general rule. There are men and women peculiarly constituted, to whose vision unfold the gates of the unknown regions, and who consciousless feel the influence of their ethereal neighbours. These are the mediums, clairvoyants, and seers of whom we hear. We have purposely left out of consideration the mystic whose awakened spiritual powers carry him through mysterious spheres of Nature. The influences felt by these classes of persons are not always of the same character. For some natures they are neutral, for others pregnant with the greatest evil. The miserable fate of a number of unhappy men and women who fall victims to these unseen influences, and are dragged down to the lowest moral level, with the loss of physical health, will be found recorded in the chronicles of Western Spiritualism. In view of the great pressure that Spiritualism - more or less known in all ages - has brought to bear upon modern thought, and the lamentable consequences which an intercourse with so-called visitants from another sphere has produced, we shall enter into a fuller account of the nature of the elementals and elementaries which, in the vast majority of cases of spirit manifestation, communicate through mediums. The intelligences controlling mediums are usually supposed to be the true egos of human beings, which survive death, and pass on to the other side.  
But what is death? And what does the esoteric doctrine teach concerning it and man's course after he has experienced that change? 
We have already seen how death was brought on this earth by the increasing materiality of man, and his consequent violation of the laws of spiritual life. Death, from being the painless transition from one state to another, became, by the accentuation of sensuality, the King of Terrors. It is also to be repeated, that is in the beginning death did not generate elementaries, man's condition being such that material desires had little sway over him. When the grosser propensities of his nature dominated the higher ones to the extent that he experienced "the lusts of life," the prison of "the world of desires" was built, and a portion of the congeries of psychical forces, which centred in his personality during life, had to be exhausted there. These elementaries or so-called spirits thus brought into existence, were compelled by their earth seeking tendencies to communicate with the physical nature of living persons with whom sympathy placed them en rapport. To quote the Master's words on this point: - 
Rapport" he says, "is in plain fact an identity of vibration between the astral part of the incarnate medium and the astral part of the disincarnate personality ... As in music two different sounds, separately distinguishable, depend for their harmony or discord upon synchronous vibrations and complementary periods; so there is rapport between medium and control when their astral molecules move in accord. And the question whether the communication shall reflect more of the one personality or the other, is determined by the relative intensity of the two sects of vibrations in the compound wave of the Akasa. The less identical the vibratory impulses the more mediumistic and less spiritual will be the message." 

 
It is seen above how the inclinations and aspirations of an individual govern his life after death. According to the Eastern philosophers, the dying thoughts are the most powerful agents in moulding the future of the individual; in fact, death itself is a miniature representation of all his acts and thoughts in life. 