Mohammed and his teachings
A brief review of the life and teachings of the Prophet
Over the years several readers have asked us why we have omitted to discuss Islam. The simple answer is lack of time. We aim to remedy this omission in this afterword, as well as satisfy those readers who have asked us whether the Koran contains any occult truths. But space forbids us from saying as much as we would like about the Prophet and his teachings, which cannot be covered in a short article. However, we may write at greater length about this important subject in future, but this is not a promise! Meanwhile, we hope that this short summary will be of interest and instruction to all our readers, regardless of their religious beliefs, or lack of any.

The first thing we would say is that no system of real Occult Science can be called complete if the religion of Islam is not mentioned. It is not our intention to write a biography of the Prophet, for there are many such, one of the most readable being that of Washington Irving. Whether they are correct is open to question, for we must be careful when reading such biographies to make due allowance for the authors' prejudices and the exaggerations of the oriental mind. That Mohammed was one of the great Messengers we do not doubt, but whether his Message was clearly understood, then or now, is another matter.

Like many Messengers, Mohammed was very reluctant to take up the work assigned to him, for deep within the mind of all such persons lies concealed the knowledge that much of what they teach will be mutilated by their followers, as we point out in so many of our articles. The mind of the true Teacher is a delicate instrument that can accept the precepts from on High and is capable of understanding the inspiration he receives. But can he always put it into words that everyone else will understand? No! This is impossible, for the masses are not so delicately constructed and lack the capacity to attune with the Divine Truths that come like a blessing from the Realms above, as we learnt in our tale of the Jihadi and the Jinn.

So it is not surprising that when Mohammed first began his Mission, he was ridiculed by many, and even attacked for the views he espoused, especially by those in powerful positions, who feared that the new teachings would undermine their worldly authority and influence, and this indeed came to pass, so that the Teacher had to flee from his native town in fear of his life.

Mohammed was illiterate, and this was a cause for pride with him when once he began to teach the often very elevated verses of the Koran. It proved, said he, that these words were truly inspired by a higher being, for how else could he—an uneducated man—utter such divine sayings? There is a great deal of truth in this, for we know how it is told that Mohammed refused over and over again the orders of the great Angel that came to him in the silence, and there is one most impressive account of how, when facing the Angel, who was angry with him on account of his refusal to go forth on his Mission, Mohammed turned away and looked in a different direction, so as not to face the Angel in his wrath. But wherever he looked, there was the Angel, seated upon a throne in the sky, and he was visible north and west, south and east, and at every point of the compass, staring with blazing eyes at the reluctant Messenger, and at last compelling him to obey.

Like many sensitive and highly strung persons, Mohammed was in need of occasional retreats into the silence, and for this purpose he often retired to a cave on Mount Hira, where he dwelt for a spell in solitude. This practice he kept up during the rest of his life, for it restored to him mental and spiritual balance, strength, and all that was needed for inspiration. He said once, referring to the paltry 'business of life' as it is lived in crowded communities: "Almost the best lot for a true believer is to pasture a flock of sheep on the mountain peaks, thus escaping with his faith far from the world's cares."

Mohammed tried to formulate a true form of worship, based upon sensible living, upon mercy, upon kind deeds and goodness, upon freedom, upon adoration of God's works and love for the Creator. A religion of tolerance especially, a religion based upon inspiration and law, and wisdom, upon a belief in a future life in a better place, which reward must be earned as the misguided Jihadi in our story learned too late to prevent his dreadful crime.

It is known that Mohammed gave way to cruelty, or rather he permitted cruel things to be done in revenge for other people's cruelties; and there he failed. But who shall blame him? Mohammed fought against the worship of idols and false deities. The idea that something of the essential good was lacking in his people was intolerable to the Prophet. They lived in rank superstition, feared fetishes and adored stone gods. Their thinking mind, when they thought at all, was ridden by spirits, jinns and demons, but the supreme reality was unknown to them, and as the Prophet saw it, this meant the death of their souls, and he was right, of course, as our tale shows.

In order to find Truth and Light, Mohammed spent more and more time in the desert. He had visions and dreams, some so terrible that he awoke covered with sweat, and his wife Khadija, if she were present at such a time, had to calm and soothe him. Then he would remain silent and evade all her questionings, or speak in words she could not understand. At last he feared that he was becoming mad, and possessed by an evil spirit, for his mind was filled with poetry and the music of transcendent words and phrases. And she tried to reassure him saying:

"Oh, my dear husband, are you not known as the sincere and trustworthy man, and how can you believe that God would permit you to be deceived in any way? Are you not a sober, pious, charitable and hospitable man? Have you not respected your parents, fed the hungry, clothed the naked, helped the traveller and protected the weak? It is impossible that you should be the sport of lying demons and malicious jinns." Thus she, the dear wife of his heart tried to comfort him in his torment. For his first wife was much older than he, but he loved her and was true to her as long as she lived and protected him to the best of her ability.

But Mohammed asked in turn: "But who can be this Being who seeks me out again and again? Who is he, who has not told me his name and from whom I cannot escape? And again he was seized with anguish, and he trembled and grew red and pale in turn. "There he is again, he is coming!!" He said this when he was wide awake and not dreaming any more. And the stranger, the fierce Angel, was there. And Mohammed, like a little child, concealed himself under Khadija's cloak, to shut out the dreaded vision, like a baby at its mother's breast.

And she covered him with her veil and let down her hair, and seated him upon her knees, embracing him closely, hiding him against her very flesh under her clothing and her black hair. And then the vision disappeared, and he was calm again. And Khadija said: "In that case he is not a lewd jinn, for he respects a woman's chastity. It can only be an angel of God."

How very human all this sounds, and how true. If you, who are reading these words, have ever beheld such strange visitors from the Realms of Light you will know just what Mohammed saw and how he felt, especially as he was a man without any previous occult training. So it is no wonder that he feared greatly and needed comfort at such times, until he became used to the phenomena and had accepted the great and dire task that was placed upon his unwilling shoulders.

And then, one day, the Angel appeared to him once more in the cave at Mount Hira. And in his hand he held a piece of silk upon which there was writing.
"Read," said the Angel.
"I cannot read," replied Mohammed.
"Read," repeated the Angel.
"I cannot," said Mohammed.
"Read," said the Angel for the third time.
"What shall I read?" asked Mohammed.
"Read," was the renewed command.
And Mohammed, in a sudden blaze of illumination read:
'Read, in the name of thy Lord, who hath created all things;
Who hath created man of congealed blood.
Read, by thy most beneficent Lord who taught the use of the pen;
Who teacheth man that which he knoweth not'.
(Koran, surah 96: 1-5)

Mohammed repeated the words written upon the silk, and though illiterate, he understood the message, which was from a book filled with divine secrets. And the Angel confirmed that he had read aright. In this way did he receive the teachings of the Koran and begin his Mission to preach the Word of God. At last the Arabs, like the Jews and the Christians, were to have a book of their own, a sacred text to recite liturgically, and a supernatural law to guide them in the Path of Salvation.

The Prophet's piety, veracity, justice, liberality, clemency, humility and abstinence were well known and all the Islamic writers refer to these in the most generous terms. His charity was so great that he had seldom any money for his own use, or that of his family and on no occasion did he partake of any of the plunder that was the fruit of the many battles waged by his followers in later years. The Islamic scholar Al Bukhari said: "God offered him the keys of the treasures of the earth, but he would not accept them."

Is this a man of low morality, worldly ambition and violence, as some now allege? No! Such a man could never have succeeded in the work Mohammed did, and there can be no doubt of the sincerity of his intentions. He is described by his contemporaries as a man of piercing wit and excellent judgment; a person of few words, with a cheerful temper, pleasant and familiar in conversation, kind to his friends, condescending to his inferiors, and did not suffer fools gladly. Such was the man, what of the Koran?

As in the Indian holy books, each chapter of the Koran is prefixed by a devout declaration, called the Bismillah, which we mentioned in our introduction to our tale of the Jihadi and the Jinn. The word OM has the same purpose in India. The Jews, for the same reason, used the form: "In the name of the Lord." It is probable that Mohammed really took this formula from the writings of the Magi, who began their chapters with the words: "In the name of the most merciful, just God."

The central doctrine of the Koran is the unity of God, and Mohammed said that the chief aim of his Mission was to restore this truth. For which reason there never was, nor could be, more than one true religion. And he was right, for as we explain in many of our articles, there is only one religion possible, but that is neither the Christian, the Jewish, the Hindu, the Arab, the Chinese, or any other religion now known. The only possible religion is Occult Science, and this is actually more a great Philosophy than a religion, for, as we said earlier, true religion is of the heart, not of words, and it can only be experienced and lived.

Muslims believe that two guardians accompany every man, to observe and write down his actions, being changed every day, and are therefore called 'al Moakkibat', or the angels who continually 'succeed' one another. If we substitute the Higher and lower selves for these angels, this teaching is not so very wrong. There is also a devil, who Mohammed named Iblis, who was once one of the Angels nearest to God's presence, but he fell, says the Koran, because he refused to pay homage to Adam at the command of God. These and many similar teachings in the book can all be traced back to the tenets of Judaism, which also found their way into the Bible.

The division of Islam into several often antagonistic sects began immediately after the death of the Prophet, and will probably continue so long as there are any Muslims left on earth—if only two! These sects and their quarrels do not concern us at all, for the reasons we gave before, namely: that when a great Teacher dies, his followers, being deprived of his personal rulings on all points, will make a mess of it all in the end. This is why the Prophet constructed the Koran, trying in vain to cover all imaginable contingencies, which is not possible for one man to do. So let us turn to the Koran itself to see what we may discover within it.

The first sentence reads: "Praise be to God, the Lord of all creatures; the most merciful, the king of the day of judgement. Thee do we worship, and of thee do we beg assistance. Direct us in the right way." This is true wisdom and true religion of the right sort and we agree with every word of it.

There are twenty-nine chapters in the Koran which begin with certain letters of the alphabet, some with a single one, others with more. These letters are believed to conceal several profound mysteries, the understanding of which has not been communicated to any mortal, except the Prophet himself. There may be a great deal of truth in this, for similar alphabetical ciphers can be found in the Bible and other sacred texts which are keys to the hidden meaning in such writings for those who have been instructed in their use.

Chapter 2 is headed by the letters A.L.M., and what these mean no one can tell either, so let us see what comes next. "Distribute alms out of what we have bestowed." A cynic might exclaim "Ha, the Prophet is after our golden shekels!" But they would be very wrong. For what we have here is a concealed reference to spiritual alms; the giving of good advice in the light of God's Wisdom, so far as we can perceive it; brotherly love and goodwill; sympathy with those who are in difficulty, and not averting our eyes when we behold sorrow, as some do in their callous egotism, but stretching out a helping hand, even if it is at some cost to ourselves. Those who heed this wise advice of the Prophet shall prosper.

"As for the unbelievers," the Chapter continues, "it will be equal to them whether thou admonish them, or do not admonish them; they will not believe. God hath sealed up their hearts and their hearing; a dimness covereth their sight, and they shall suffer a grievous punishment." The Jihadi learned the truth of this when he found himself in hell. As he also learnt that God does not 'punish' anyone, but sends them forth into incarnation after incarnation, so that they too shall learn the great Lesson in the end and turn away from the ways of the world and its beguiling illusions.

One of the things Mohammed taught was predestination; a very sore point indeed when Occult Science teaches us that man has free will, and makes his own destiny. We part from Mohammed in regard to this doctrine for it is untrue in every way and we discuss some of the reasons why in the afterword to the tenth of our Astral Conversations.

Occult Science teaches that we are placed in certain conditions at birth, good, bad or indifferent, and that we use these conditions, each in our own way, and either make a mess of it all or a success. And that is all there is to it. But unless we are indeed very highly evolved, and true Masters in every sense of the word, we have no free will in regard to where and when and why we return to earth again at any time. This is the only thing that is arranged for us; all the rest is for ourselves and our free will. Work this out for yourself if you wish, for we have said all there is to be said about it.

We hope that the few examples we have given you from the Koran will enable you to come to a decision about its value and truth. Read the rest by yourself, and read between the lines, never forgetting that it was composed to teach the learned as well as the unlearned, then and now. The Koran, like all other holy books, including the Bible, has had the same fate among the different classes of men among whom it has been disseminated. It has been the cause of the Highest inspiration to some and the lowest superstition and criminality among others, as we see only too clearly today, when the Prophet's words are twisted to support the ideologies of fanatics and further their evil designs.
