SHALL WE BECOME CIVILIZED?
(April 1930)
“The truly devoted, for the purification of the heart, perform actions with their bodies, their minds, their understanding, and their senses, putting away all self-interest.” – Bhagavad-Gita, V, 11.

India is cursed with millions of idlers who call themselves Sannyasis and are generally accepted as such. They not only make the economic situation of this poor country worse than it already is, but also are a moral plague, for they exploit the devotion of millions of villagers, especially the women. They are false and fleeting shadows, but faintly indicative of the very few and the rarely to be encountered true sons of light, the genuine Sannyasis. To such true ones we give salutations and say – Namastae!

The Gita is the book of rules and conduct for true Sannyasis. Its fifth discourse is named Sannyasa-Yoga, yoga or devotion by means of renunciation of action. In the shloka quoted above, we find described by Shri Krishna what a Yogi does. A real Yogi is a truly devoted person, and he performs many kinds of actions. He is not idle either with his body and its senses, or with his mind, or with his discriminative Buddhi.

It is a matter of conviction with us that India’s emancipation depends on India producing Sannyasis of the true type. Towards that end the idea should go abroad that to support and feed the idler who poses as a Sannyasi is irreligious and unspiritual, and that it is false charity, for it is given to the wrong person, at the wrong place and at the wrong time. An elimination of false Yogis and Sannyasis must take place.

How can India produce true Yogis and Sannyasis? First, by understanding what the words imply, and then by a few patriot souls setting out not to talk but to practise Yoga and Sannyasa.

A Yogi is one who has taken the path in the direction of his own Inner God, of Higher Self, and recognizing It as his admonisher and sustainer has begun to act selflessly.

A Sannyasi is one who renounces not the doing of actions but the result of their performance. He goes through his appointed work in life, follows the wheel of duty to race and kin, to friend and foe, but endeavours seriously and regularly to close his mind to pleasures as to pains.

These definitions arise, over and over again, in our study of the Gita. The Mahatma speaking to his Chela repeats the concepts of real Sannyasa and true Tyaga, and quotes Himself and His like as examples of Men who act, Their renunciation being of the sweet fruits of Their deeds.

There is another thing which the Gita brings out. Nowhere do we find that only a caste-man or even an Aryan alone can enter the Path of Renunciation. Can Musalmans become Sannyasis without turning infidels? Of course they can. Every real Sufi is a Sannyasi, every true Dervish is a Yogi, and the noble word Faqir has been as debased by its application to worthless beggars as the name Tyagi. Can Parsis practise Yoga? Certainly; for every Parsi heart is the receptacle of the embers of the Sacred Fire, which when once kindled, makes him the Son of Ahura Mazda. For the Christians, St. Paul’s admonition holds true: “If the Spirit of him who raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwelleth in you.” (Romans, VIII, 11). Every true Buddhist knows the injunction of Gotama: “Look within, thou art Buddha.” Every Jew familiar with his Kabala knows about the alchemical process whereby the self is raised unto the Self.

Any man or woman acquiring a new attitude to life can tread the Path of Renunciation. Such a man need not give up his home to make the jungle his habitat; he has to begin to live in the home differently. He must not commit the sin of running away from his duties, but should perform every single one of them, without anxiety about the accruing results. He must train and control his senses; he must exercise and make agile and healthy his body; he must act mentally, i.e., study and reflect upon what he studies, and make use of his discrimination born of his meditations in the performance of all acts. Throughout he must bear in mind the object, which the above-quoted Gita verse advocates – purification of the heart. Body and its senses, mind and its powers are but the instruments which are to be used to purify the heart.

It is not what we do that alone matters, but also how we do anything. What we should avoid doing are those acts which take us away from our congenital duties; what we should be attentive to is the timely performance of all that is to be done. The method of such performance makes the Yogi, the Sannyasi, the Tyagi – to do our duty by every duty, regardless of consequences; to learn that in every station of life the Soul is educating itself, and that what matters is that education continues irrespective of its bestowing on us pleasure or inflicting on us pain. In opulence and poverty alike the Soul grows – more in poverty than in opulence.

To educate ourselves in the school of life we need a discipline, and the Gita supplies it for every stage of human evolution. We have to impose that discipline on ourselves. The barbarian in us receives his death-warrant when we take ourselves in hand and energize ourselves to act with thought and deliberation. To be self-reliant is to be dependent on the Great Self within and not on any outside agency. To acquire true individuality we must live daily by self-induced and self-devised efforts, and even though our past errors may check and thwart us we must persist and ascend through all degrees of intelligence till perfection is reached. To start this journey is to touch civilization, for thus we leave chaos behind and enter the world of order. To start us on that journey the Wise One said:

Rouse thyself by thy Self, examine thyself by thy Self; thus Self-protected and attentive wilt thou live happily –Dhammapada, 379.

THE RIGHT RESOLVE
(June 1930)
“Even if the man of most evil ways worship me with exclusive devotion, he is to be considered as righteous, for he hath judged aright.” – Bhagavad-Gita, IX. 30.

Such verses as the above in the different scriptural books have been misinterpreted by the priest and purohit in every age and clime. Every religion nowadays is presented to the world for its superior claims. The truly spiritual man knows that all religions are true at their root and false as separated and separative factors.

The study of religions leads us to the eclectic nature of Religion. The Gita is an eclectic book. It is meant for all, even for one “who may be of the womb of sin.” In the above Shloka it is not said that only a Brahman or an Aryan who had judged aright must be considered righteous, but all, whoever and whatever they be, provided of course that they “worship me” i.e., Krishna. But the Lord of Mystery was not ignorant that different men follow diverse ways of worship. He refers to them in this very ninth discourse. He also says: “I am the Ego which is seated in the hearts of all beings” (X. 20), including the man of most evil ways.

It is a well-known philosophical axiom that each one of us understands the universe in terms of his own power of senses, of mind, or of heart. The resplendent universe does not exist for the blind; the laws of Nature exist not for the lunatic; the good, the beautiful, the true exist not for the hard-hearted, the ugly tempered, and the selfish individual. Thus also, we are able to cognize the nature of Krishna only by the aid of that Spirit in us which is Himself. Thus we can see that it is the spirit of Krishna which in the true Christian is named the spirit of Christ, and unless, it is said, the Christ be born in him, he may be a church-goer but not a Christian. A Buddhist may repeat “I worship the Buddha”; unless the Tathagata light is lighted in his heart, he is not a true follower of the Enlightened One.

Krishna is the Self within each one of us. The first step in spiritual evolution is the acknowledgement of that fact. We may call it the Christ within, or the Buddha within; we may call ourselves “sons of Ahura Mazda” or “servants of Allah”; we have to recognize that names matter little and the reality they represent means everything.

Just as a single idea can be expressed in any tongue, and in pictorial and symbolic ideographs, so also the Spirit in man is one and the same though its shining forth in each is different according to the evolution of each human being. There are men of evil ways in each religion and nation, and for them all a method is here presented.

If a man resolves aright he is to be considered righteous; and his resolve is true when he has taken to “worshipping” Krishna. This is the first step: each person must begin to worship the Spirit of Deity which dwells in his own heart. What is worship? – it is becoming worthy of relationship; to be united to the Divinity within is the object of worship. We are in essence divine and spiritual. To succeed in transferring that divinity and spirituality to the living, toiling, suffering man is the task set out before us, by the Gita. To be united to the Higher Self is Yoga, and Yoga and worship are synonymous. So any man or woman who has resolved to listen to the voice of his own conscience, to seek for the still small Voice of God in his own heart, to gain communion with his own Higher Self, has judged and resolved rightly and is to be accounted righteous. In this doctrine is not offered some vicarious atonement, some hope of distant heaven, to some special few. Here is more than hope – certitude for each and every one, provided he exerts himself along the right line.

To sit in judgment over our lower self and to note all its foibles; to review its mischievous tendencies and correct them; – this is the task each one of us must perform at the close of every day. This leads to right resolve and the Great Light dawns in our consciousness as we repeat to ourselves the words of a Great Sage: “He who will not find our truths in his soul and within himself, has poor chances of success in Occultism.”

THE UNBRIDLED TONGUE
(July 1930)
“Among the wise of secret knowledge I am their silence.” – Bhagavad-Gita X. 38.

In the tenth discourse of the Gita, Krishna, as Ishvara the Lord, describes his powers and excellences – Vibhutis. The Parsis will find a similar description in their Ahuramazda Yasht, and thus see that Krishna and Ahuramazda are but two names of the same omnipresent force or power that ordinarily we call Deity or God.

Among these divine excellences the Mahatma names – Silence. Those who are wise keep silent about many things. The speech which is necessary is alone indulged in by great Souls. Speech being a creative power and its effects more widespread than ordinarily recognized; those who start to tread the Path of Holiness are called upon to control their tongue and purify their speech. Not only angry and ugly words are to be discarded but also unnecessary ones. The young chela is known as a shravaka, a listener; and Pythagoras, taught by his Aryan Gurus, introduced in his own school at Crotona the degree of – the hearers. Modern society is mostly run on talk. The art of conversation has very greatly degenerated and useless talk is the order of the day. As is to be expected such useless talk soon degenerates into gossip, and kind men and women turn cruel. To kill the reputation or fair name or character of another is greater cruelty than to kill his body.

We have to learn the scientific fact that speech is creative, that words have power. Those who have observed the effects of mere physical sounds in the formation of complex patterns in fine sand can understand how the same sounds must produce in invisible substances like Ether other forms and effects. Add to this the fact that our words carry feelings and thoughts, and it is logical to deduce that the potency residing in the spoken word is tremendous indeed.

Often we do not learn the mischief caused by our own talk. We indulge in small talk and even in gossip thoughtlessly. Though we all are aware that there are beings who call themselves humans who talk loosely and abominably of a set purpose, and indulge in gossip deliberately, fortunately the number of such wicked ones is not great. Most of us slip into the sin of injurious speech, and pay for the slip and the sin in the form of a debasing influence on our own character. A foul-mouthed person, an unconscious gossip, a small talker or a shop talker, as a silent muni, all carry the marks of their habit and indulgence in their own characters.

What shall we do, those of us who desire to ennoble our characters, purify our conduct, and perform self-less actions? We are taught by all great sages to practise mortification and austerities of speech. They, knowing the intimacy subsisting between thought and word, ask us to proceed to the root and guard our internal thoughts. Words are like bodies and their souls are thoughts. Therefore, we are told to read and repeat words embodying grand and glorious ideas. Every religion imposes on its believers the task of reading and repeating the scriptures. In these generations the wise and salutary injunction is either not observed, or when it is observed it is casual, formal, not understood and a travesty of efficacious practice. Prayers muttered without understanding are useless; reading of the Holy Writ with attention, and reflecting on the Teachings which they impart are great energizers, and raise our consciousness to an elevation from which a quiet survey of life-events and happenings is possible and profitable.

No man can see clearly without some reflection; no man can act worthily without elevating ideas. In stress of circumstances we cannot succeed without a storing of noble thoughts in quiet hours. Thus it becomes essential that each one of us keep the company of inspiring words, of potent words, day by day and secure for ourselves the beneficent influence they emit. Gentle speech, truthful speech, friendly speech flowers from a dwelling on and recitation of great words such as are to be found in the Gita and the Upanishads, in Dhammapada and Suttanipata, in the Gathas and the Yashats, in Tao-Teh King and Sermon on the Mount and that priceless gem for all aspirants of the higher life, The Voice of the Silence.

Another course is also laid down: every day we must practise silence and control of speech. We must give Mother Nature a chance to speak to us; she has songs for our soul’s ear; we fail to hear them because our mind, with its memory and attention, is engaged with things of the senses and the flesh. Before the day’s activities begin, or after they come to a close, we must remain silent making our own mind-contents silent and then repeat some memorized idea or another expressed by a master mind and dwell thereon. During the activities of mundane life we must learn to guard our tongue, and though hard is the task, gradually success will be attained, for man can do what men have done.

As a third step we are told that we must keep the company of holy men. Sat-sang, good company, is a necessity of the higher life. Not in solitude but in company of like-minded souls is real progress made. The company of students of the Wisdom and of wise persons gives us the practice to speak good and holy words. Every time wise words are uttered, the power to speak them again is unfolded. “Attain to knowledge and you will attain to speech” it is said. Knowledge comes from written and spoken words, and to keep contact with them is beneficial.

Therefore it is said – “Learn the value of a man’s words and expressions, and you know him. Each man has a measure of his own for everything. This he offers you, inadvertently, in his words.”

WHO, WHERE, WHAT IS GOD?
(August 1930)
“Behold, O son of Pritha, my forms by hundreds and by thousands, of diverse kinds divine, of many shapes and fashions.” – Bhagavad-Gita, XI. 5.

By study and search truth can be known about all things and about the source of all things. The general ignorance and confusion about the nature of Deity is chiefly due to the notion that nothing can be really known about it. This is contrary to the teachings of all sages, seers and prophets. Such Divine Men as Krishna and Rama, Gotama and Tsong-Kha-Pa, Jesus and Zarathushtra, Lao Tzu and Pythagoras, have taught how they attained the knowledge of the Supreme, nay more, how we too can attain. We may not succeed so completely, but surely we are capable of learning something of what they taught, of practising what we learn, and of realizing, in some measure, the fruits of our practice.

Almost all religions have been degraded, and the grand concept of an omnipresent, eternal, boundless and immutable Principle which is Life and Deity has become transformed into an illogical and absurd belief in a Personal God, outside of His Universe. It is late in the day to write against the blasphemy which is connected with the idea of a Personal God; it is impossible for intuition to accept, and for reason to assent to, the dogma of belief in a Personal God, separate from His Universe which, for some mysterious and never to be found out purpose, He has created. Every thinking man has put away that childish superstition.

Religion is supposed to be a matter of belief; it ought to be a subject for study, for strong search, for fearless questioning.

In all religions, Deity is said to be omnipresent and the simple logical deduction is that It is everywhere and in all things. The notion of everywhere is related to space, and therefore we can say that space is another name for Deity.

Also in all religions Deity is emanating; from within Its bosom things, forces and beings stream forth. But this is the property of Life. Forms of Life are made by Life, made of Life, made in Life. With propriety then we can name Deity as Life.

Thus Living Space, known and to be known, emerges as our primary concept of God and Deity.

This brings us to the second idea of all religious philosophies; the dual aspects of the One Concept – Space and Life, Matter and Spirit, Body and Soul. These are two aspects of the One Reality which is Deity. Ignorance and misunderstanding of this teaching have produced the faulty view of God and Satan, Ormazd and Ahriman. The correct teaching is that good and evil are but relative aspects of the One. Thus Spirit and Matter are but a pair, like Spento and Angro Mainyu of our Parsi brothers, both aspects of the One Life, of the One Ahura Mazda. (See Yasna, XLV–2.)

But there is a third factor, which also all ancient religious philosophies have taken account of – Intelligence of Spirit and of Matter, of Spento and of Angro, of God and of Satan. Life in Space, Spirit in Matter, Spento operating with Angro, Satan fighting against God, all imply and indicate the existence of Intelligence, of Mind. This is degraded into the carnalized and anthropomorphized notion of the Trinity and Trimurti – three Persons, three Separate Gods, to be prayed to and propitiated.

Life, Space, Intelligence are three aspects of Deity, omnipresent and ever active. Nowhere in nature is anything bereft of these three. Dead things are alive; there is no empty space; some form of intelligence works incessantly everywhere.

How can these metaphysical ideas be used by us in a practical manner?

If Deity is everywhere it also manifests Itself as Life, Space and Intelligence in the human kingdom and therefore in all human beings. What we know ordinarily as Spirit, Soul and Body are Life, Intelligence and Space or Matter. Our intelligence or mind is the connecting link between our Individual Spirits and our bodily senses, organs and the brain. Our mentality has unfolded to the extent which enables us to be self-conscious of ourselves. Intelligence which is self-conscious is the human soul in each of us. It is unfolding, all the time; most men do not even know that unconsciously to themselves their intelligent souls are growing. It is a stupenduous change in us when we clearly perceive that the growth of the Soul is the purpose of human life. Not the acquisition of wealth, not the gain of fame, not the exertion of power or even of love in our fellow-men, is the purpose of human existence, but to learn of our own natures, spiritual, mental and bodily, to find the ways of deliberate and quickened unfolding of all three, according to and under Law. We find out by study, meditation and sacrifice that each one of us is Deity, the Mysterious Lord Krishna. “Our Father who art in heaven” of whom the Christian prayer speaks is our own Divine Soul with which, like Jesus, we shall realize our one-ness by living as he lived. Each one of us will dance, like Shiva, the Dance of Life, when all our passions and lusts have been consumed in the fire of knowledge which is symbolized by the burning place where Shiva is to be found.

A correct view of prayer as communion with the spiritual and divine aspect of ourselves which is to be found in the closet of the heart will take us into a new universe. We shall begin to look for the expression of Deity in our brother-men, and proceeding we shall perceive Its working in the many kingdoms of nature, and growing we shall gain the Vision of Arjuna who saw the Deity as Universe, the Body of Life, mysterious, conscious, resplendent, in which everything lives and moves and has its being – we blundering mortals included.

WHERE TO BEGIN?
(September 1930)
“But those who seek this sacred ambrosia – the religion of immortality – even as I have explained it, full of faith, intent on me above all others, and united to devotion, are my most beloved.” – Bhagavad Gita, XII. 20.

The greatest virtue of the Gita is its practicality; even for the man of the modern age of gold and electricity it offers something which can be practised.

In its compact completeness the Gita proves of even greater value to the aspirant who desires to live up to his ideals. Unlike the Zoroastrian Gathas, or even the Sermon on the Mount, it is not fragmentary. The only other message of early eras as compact but not as complete is Lao Tzu’s Tao Teh Ching. Christian Church authorities know, and many among them admit, that Christendom cannot live according to the tenets of the Sermon on the Mount without destroying itself. The main reason for this is that an equally convincing programme for the higher life such as the Sermon gives is not available in the Bible for less strong souls; it is the Sermon or nothing, and so it has naturally resulted in mostly nothing. Scepticism of Science is born of experiences which have been and are real to the consciousness of scientists. In the Church there is hardly anything except belief for the ordinary intelligent mind, – which that mind rightly rejects. This will be presently the case with all India Hindu and Muslim alike. As western education spreads and western institutions are adopted, religious dogmatism, blind belief, credulity and superstition are bound to receive rude but deserved shocks. Our only hope is that in their shattering, spiritual knowledge, faith rooted in such knowledge, open-minded enquiry into soul-life and soul-problems and the tenets of old-world philosophies will not die out, as happened in Europe and America. The transition period from the death of creeds to the birth of spiritual life may become prolonged and harmful to India if materialism and scepticism about soul-verities come to the forefront. The remedy lies in the popularizing of the teachings of the Gita, which, as we have pointed out before, is for all Indians. When creeds are discarded, there must be something to take their place, and we do not know of any Indian Message so potent and powerful as that of the Gita. Because of its sound logic, its consistency, its thorough reasonableness, it appeals to the mind of man; because of its deep spirituality it touches the intuitive heart of man; because of its vigour and practicality, it energizes man to right action in his individual as in his public life.

In the twelfth discourse will be found the different stages of the uphill path of Soul-life. The most strenuous as the most simple are described. It is the chapter on Bhakti-Yoga, and the Devotion to be practised makes the practitioner the disciple and friend of Shri Krishna, and the follower of the Religion of Immortality. All who practise their respective disciplines as herein explained are beloved of the Mahatma. After the variety of steps, suited to different stages of human evolution, is given a superb description of the man successful in his efforts: he has risen above the pairs of opposites, and is unexpecting and unsolicitous about the results of things, has acquired control over his speech, and is free from the attachments of home, country or race. He has attained that Freedom which speaks not, but is at the service of his fellows every hour of the day.

What are these steps and stages?

In verses 7 to 12 these steps and stages are described: – (1) He who having united himself to his own Higher Self acts as that Self and in his lower nature is not affected by the outside universe, and thus is free from the bondage of Karma. (2) He who with the aid of his Manas (Thinking mind) and Buddhi (Intuitive discrimination), both influenced and energized by Wisdom, endeavours to penetrate the Atman, the Self, and reaches the vicinity of the first stage of the emancipated Dhyani. (3) He who is not able to use his higher attention and image-making faculty, first requisites for the preceding stage, regularly attempts by practise to feel and come in contact with the Higher Self with the assistance of his ordinary intelligence and knowledge. (4) He who is not capable of such purification and concentration of the third stage becomes intent on the performance of only a certain class of deeds which are dana–charity, tapas–mortification, and yajna–sacrifice, exclusive of all else. (5) But the mere mortal is not able even to do this which gives him a sure refuge, unbeknown to himself, in the Higher Self, and so he is told to do all he has to do, but with self-control, and renouncing the fruits of all his actions.

Each one among us has to find out on what step on the ladder of spiritual life he stands, of what he is capable. Certain things are natural and easy to us, and the steps in advance require strenuous endeavour. If it be asked: what about someone who is not able to begin the practice of self-control and renunciation of the fruits of action? The answer is: It is not that he is not able, but that he is not prepared to commence living spiritually. In the 12th verse Krishna says that renunciation – tyaga – prescribed for the 5th or the starting stage is superior to all else, for from it results peace and tranquillity – Shanti. This because whatever the stage, the doing of deeds, the wearing of bodies, the discharge of obligations to man and Nature, are strongly and repeatedly advocated. Even the Mahatma Krishna is engaged in action all the time.

No man is denied his right to Wisdom and Immortality and for each the way begins where he is, where he actually stands – at home, in the market-place, East or West. And so it is said in the Voice of the Silence:

No warrior volunteering fight in the fierce strife between the living and the dead (the immortal Higher Ego and the lower personal ego) not one recruit can ever be refused the right to enter on the Path that leads towards the field of Battle.

For, either he shall win, or he shall fall.

Yea, if he conquers, Nirvana shall be his. Before he casts his shadow off his mortal coil, that pregnant cause of anguish and illimitable pain – in him will men a great and holy Buddha honour.

And if he falls, even then he does not fall in vain; the enemies he slew in the last battle will not return to life in the next birth that will be his.

But if thou would’st Nirvana reach, or cast the prize away, let not the fruit of action and inaction be thy motive, O thou of dauntless heart.

Know that the Bodhisattva who Liberation changes for Renunciation to don the miseries of “Secret Life” is called “Thrice Honoured,” O thou candidate for woe throughout the cycles.

SELF, THE DISCIPLINARIAN
(October 1930)
“The Spirit in the body is called Maheswara, the Great Lord, the Spectator, the Admonisher, the Sustainer, the Enjoyer, and also Paramatma, the highest soul.” – Bhagavad-Gita, XIII-22.

To discipline the lower nature by the higher is to raise the self by the Self. The superior aspect of our being has to look after the sensuous and passional part in us.

Discipline which is imposed upon boys at school is only partially effective, as it is imposed from without. Modern educationists are finding out what the old Gurus well knew, that unless the understanding and willingness of the pupil are at work the discipline imposed remains impotent.

The school of life also imposes upon us all certain discipline; we chafe against this because we have not grasped that this is an honest universe and in it nothing happens by chance but everything is an effect from a previous cause, which effect in its turn becomes causal. The real and only teacher who can discipline us is our own Higher Self.

Suffering, chastisement, frustration, which under the Law of Karma we encounter, discipline us provided they succeed in bringing the lower and satanic nature of ours in contact with the Higher and Divine in us. Thousands suffer but do not learn from their suffering. We learn from life-events, especially the painful ones, only when our thinking-discriminating nature reviews and evaluates the event. Generally people see the finger of an outside God in all their life-events and so pray to Him and try to propitiate Him and thus prepare themselves to become rank atheists. We have to learn to see the finger of our own Higher Self, for there is the source of all adjustement and discipline.

People often say – “If I can take care of my moods and selfishness I should be all right.” They do not know the mechanics of the human machine, and ignorance cannot succeed in psychological experimentation any more than in physical. One has to know whence moods and selfishness arise, what superior agency can cure them, and how. All this knowledge is available in the Bhagavad-Gita.

The thirteenth discourse describes the human machine; how it operates ordinarily, what is the effect of its perfect operation; and what is the technique for the latter.

Concentration on the contents and characteristics of the Higher Self in us is the alpha and omega of the Hidden Life.

What the Inner Ruler in each one of us is, should be the subject for study and reflection. Once its powers are intellectually known by us we will be ready to use them and realize in ourselves their strength. We are universal and impersonal intelligences; each one of us has to know this fact in our personal beings. This is evolution. When the separated personal man recognizes that he is neither separate from the whole of Nature, nor is he the mask known to his fellow-mortals, but that he is a Centre of Life and Light in himself, he takes the first step. This intellectual recognition results from study, from meditation, and from the spirit of sacrifice.

Now, in the above-quoted verse we are taught the characteristics of the Higher Self.

In the innermost recess of the heart dwells the Lord who is the Supreme Self – Maheswara and Paramatma. In each one of us is the Lord, and in all He is a ray of the One Self. The Supreme Self is like the Sun, and Its ray dwells in each and acts as the Lord in the body.

The verse gives four striking characteristics of this Lord, the Inner Ruler immortal in us – (1) the Spectator, (2) the Admonisher, (3) the Sustainer and (4) the Enjoyer. If we could in some measure grasp this four-fold function, we should see light in the midst of the darkness which now prevails.

The God in us is the eternal witness of all that happens in or to us. The body has its powers, the mind also, with which it functions; will and feeling produce other phenomena; but whoever the agent producing action of body, speech or intellect, the Spiritual Soul, the Real Man, is the Spectator. It is true that there are Godless men, i.e., men who having denied the existence of their spiritual principles, have lost for themselves the sure guidance that comes from the Higher Self. Even such can retrace their steps by honest enquiry and persistent search. This Being in us who watches the panorama of events, has to be recognized by our brain-minds. For then he manifests his second power.

The God in us is the admonisher: whenever the senses of flesh, dragging the mind after them, make us commit wrong, as invariably happens, the Higher Self speaks. It uses our conscience which is the voice of all our accumulated experiences and tells us what not to do, where to desist. It is always well to listen to the voice of conscience, but we must learn to make sure that it is the voice of conscience, and further that it is in accord with the expressions of laws which constantly operate in Nature. When through the study of first principles and basic fundamentals which metaphysics give us we give culture to our conscience, the Higher Self reveals to us his third power.

The God in us is the sustainer of all our actions. This might sound strange and raise the question – can the Higher Self sustain the wickedness of the lower self, with which men are so closely identified? It is to be understood that every action of ours has a lesson to impart and every experience yields its power to the human soul. When we have acquired the habit of attending to our voice of conscience; and when we have learnt to move after thought on the basic principles involved in our movement, we do not indulge in deliberate wrong-doing. These two processes are our safeguards, and yet, being but frail mortals, we do commit errors. Because of the attention we have paid to our conscience, and the precaution we have taken to consult the codes of the Science of the Self, we gain even from our error due good. This is due to the sustaining characteristic of the Higher Self. His sacrificial nature is great. He, so to speak, makes himself a scape-goat for the foibles of the lower self, because that lower self has brought itself in line with the vision and admonition of the Higher. And as sacrifice always begets joy we see how the Higher Self enjoys.

The God in us is the enjoyer. In his own realm, i.e., in his own native state, the Self has no opportunity to learn about the mighty magic of prakriti or matter. That is why he embodies himself in matter, and learning in and through it becomes master of matter. When his agent and ambassador the lower self lives and moves and has its being rooted in the higher, the latter enjoys the process of unfoldment and growth. Like the bee, the Higher Self sucks the nectar of Life, till it is all-knowing self-conscious Life.

To attain contact with, and experience, the nirvanic bliss of the Spiritual Self, we must begin by recognizing the existence of the divinity in us. Next, we should proceed to listen to its admonitions and advice, and learn through proper study its ways and methods, so that its sustenance reaches us. Then its joy and bliss will be ours, and in face of trouble and encumbered with pain, we shall still radiate the Light of Wisdom which is peace and happiness.

THE NATURE OF THE LOWER SELF
(February 1931)
“The three great qualities called Sattva, Rajas and Tamas – light or truth, passion or desire, and indifference or darkness – are born from nature, and bind the imperishable soul to the body.” – Bhagavad-Gita, xiv. 5.

If the thirteenth discourse of the Gita unveils the facts about the nature of the Higher Self, the fourteenth chapter treats of the nature of the lower.

The lower self is born of Prakriti, Matter or Nature. Because matter has attributes or gunas the moment the soul contacts body, the latter binds the soul by and through those attributes. Matter is inert and dense; but it is mobile in spite of its inertia; it has rhythm of movement because it is vitalized and energized by the light of the spirit.

The Man of Matter is full of inertia, or is full of movements, or is full of harmony and rhythm, but, evil or good, he is under the sway of matter. As long as he is ensouled and aroused by any of these three he is mortal, subject to pain and decay.

The Man of Spirit is full of ideation, intuition and inspiration. The Self exists perpetually in a state of contemplation which is creative and therefore blissful.

We have to labour and free ourselves who are centred in the lower, so that we may experience in our consciousness, our brain-minds, the Presence of the higher.

In each one of us one of the three attributes predominates; the remaining two are not so active, though they operate. When Tamas–Inertia predominates we become deluded, indifferent to life and duty, lazy in body and indolent in mind. When Rajas–Mobility predominates our sense-desires flourish, love of gain increases and begets ambitions, and actions and more activities are initiated, and there is restlessness of body and mind. Large numbers of ailments and nervous disorders are due to the predominance of Rajas in our civilization. When Sattva–Rhythm predominates the man is happy, lucid and peaceful and engages himself in the study of Wisdom and in the service of his fellows. But all three imprison the soul in the body. Dhritarashtra is the symbol of Tamas, Duryodhana of Rajas, Arjuna of Sattva: Krishna is above and beyond them having transcended them.

The spiritual life is the overcoming of the influence of the gunas or attributes of matter. This means overcoming not only of evil but also of good. When we surpass the three which are coexistent with the body, we are released from pain, old age and death, for thereby we drink of the Water of Immortality. It does not mean that the body does not have its aches or old age or death, but that the man who has freed himself from the tyranny of these three powers is not affected by aches, does not feel the burden of time and age, and is untouched by death itself.

In answer to his Chela’s question, the Master Krishna describes the virtues and characteristics of the man who has overcome the gunas.

Most of us are inert and lazy and are goaded into action by the necessity of keeping body and soul together. In the competition of life we unfold ambitions, multiply desires, are entwined by activities to actions, and succeed in bringing upon ourselves afflictions; this stage leads to the next, for in anguish we begin the search, by knowledge we overcome pain and grow in contentment and thus the happy stage is reached.

Just as the perfect realization of ourselves as the Higher Self begins in the intellectual recognition of the fact that a Higher Self exists, followed by an enquiry into its powers and modes of manifestation, so also the complete freedom which emancipates the personal man from the slavery of the material qualities starts with the intellectual recognition that all persons are continuously affected by gunas or attributes of prakriti or matter and nature. The second step lies in the determining by each of his own particular predominating quality. The legitimate use of each of these properties of nature is indicated in the Gita, the remedy for overcoming the disease pertaining to each is also referred to, and how to take the next step in front of each is clearly shown. The tamasic man is evil, though not consciously active in it; the rajasic man is evil and then evil and good; the sattvic man is good; one stage leads the other and transforms the evil into the good man. But evolution does not stop there – the good man has to grow into the spiritual man. Between goodness and spirituality is a gulf, the same as between wickedness and righteousness. The selfish man becomes unselfish and then flowers into selflessness.

Is it possible for us to grow in goodness? Can we in this day and age unfold spirituality? Yes, is the answer; it is more normal to be good than otherwise; and knowledge reproclaimed in our cycle gives aid more than ever before to the aspirant to spiritual life. In the words of a modern sage: –

“That which propels towards, and forces evolution, i.e., compels the growth and development of Man towards perfection, is (a) the MONAD, or that which acts in it unconsciously through a force inherent in itself; and (b) the lower astral body or the personal SELF. The former, whether imprisoned in a vegetable or an animal body, is endowed with, is indeed itself, that force. Owing to its identity with the ALL-FORCE, which, as said, is inherent in the Monad, it is all-potent on the Arupa, or formless plane. On our plane, its essence being too pure, it remains all-potential, but individually becomes inactive: e.g., the rays of the Sun, which contribute to the growth of vegetation, do not select this or that plant to shine upon. Uproot the plant and transfer it to a piece of soil where the sunbeam cannot reach it, and the latter will not follow it. So with the Atman: unless the higher Self or EGO gravitates towards its Sun – the Monad – the lower Ego, or personal Self, will have the upper hand in every case. For it is this Ego, with its fierce Selfishness and animal desire to live a Senseless life (Tanha) which is “the maker of the tabernacle,” as Buddha calls it in Dhammapada (153 and 154) . . . It is equally true that the Atman alone warms the inner man; i.e., it enlightens it with the ray of divine life and alone is able to impart to the inner man, or the reincarnating Ego, its immortality. . . .

“Spirituality is on its ascending arc, and the animal or physical impedes it from steadily progressing on the path of its evolution only when the selfishness of the personality has so strongly infected the real inner man with its lethal virus, that the upward attraction has lost all its power on the thinking reasonable man. In sober truth, vice and wickedness are an abnormal, unnatural manifestation, at this period of our human evolution – at least they ought to be so. The fact that mankind was never more selfish and vicious than it is now, civilized nations having succeeded in making of the first and ethical characteristic, of the second an art, is an additional proof of the exceptional nature of the phenomenon.”