The Teachings of Bhavani Shankar
Visitors to this website may have read or heard of the book


A photograph of Bhavani Shankar displayed at the Bangalore (India) Lodge of the United Lodge of Theosophists.
“The Doctrine of the Bhagavad Gita” by Bhavani Shankar. The contents of that book – which appeals to Theosophists and Hindus alike – are transcripts of talks Bhavani Shankar gave in Calcutta and Madras, India, in 1914 and 1925. “The Doctrine of the Bhagavad Gita” was first published by the Popular Prakashan company in Bombay in 1966. Later, it was republished by the United Lodge of Theosophists in Santa Barbara, California, USA, through their Concord Grove Press. Unfortunately both these editions are now out of print.

As we have explained elsewhere:

Bhavani Shankar (1859-1936) was one of the most prominent of the last surviving Indian chelas (disciples) of the Masters from H. P. Blavatsky’s Adyar days. He is spoken of in glowing terms by the Masters in their Letters and elsewhere and was a chela of the Master K.H.

Neither he, nor any of the other individuals who were objectively proven and known to be chelas of the Masters, ever supported or endorsed in any way the work and teachings of those various later “Theosophists” who claimed (but could never actually prove or demonstrate) to be the chelas of the same Masters, such as Annie Besant, C. W. Leadbeater, and Alice Bailey.

Recalling the written words of one of the Masters that the Adyar Society had become “a soulless corpse,” destined to “fall to pieces” as the inevitable Karmic result of its infidelity to HPB, and seeing how Besant and Leadbeater seemed hell-bent on destroying the legacy and sacrifices of HPB and thoroughly rewriting and altering the teachings of Theosophy beyond all recognition, Bhavani Shankar separated himself entirely from the Theosophical Society and aligned himself instead with the United Lodge of Theosophists (often known simply as the ULT) when B. P. Wadia established it at Bombay.

He felt that here was an association – apparently the only one – which was true to the real Cause and real Teachings of the real Masters of whom he was the faithful disciple and with whom he was personally acquainted. As part of his regular daily sadhana or spiritual practice in the latter part of his life, Bhavani Shankar used to focus on HPB in heartfelt and reverential meditation and invited and encouraged others to do the same.

As for the attitudes and teachings of the likes of Leadbeater, Besant, and Bailey, he described them as “blasphemous talk” and “flippant prattle,” saying that in their books “high names and doctrines have been dragged down to the level of modern ignorance.”

The November 1931 issue of “The Theosophical Movement” magazine, started by B. P. Wadia and still published today by the Mumbai (formerly Bombay) ULT in India, shared the following under the heading “PANDIT BHAVANI SHANKAR”:

“Under the auspices of the Bombay U.L.T. the veteran and venerated Theosophist Pandit Bhavani Shankar gave a series of heart-stirring talks on the Bhagavad-Gita. “Principles of Cosmos” “Principles of the Solar System” “Principles of Man” and “Raja Vidya or Theosophy” were the subjects of the four lectures: a fifth evening was set aside for answering questions.

“Pandit Bhavani Shankar rallied round the flag of H.P.B. in Bombay in 1880, and gave himself to the Cause of pure Theosophy as taught by her and her Masters. For forty years he has gone up and down the vast territory of his beloved India, preaching the Theosophic gospel of the Bhagavad-Gita. His consecrated life of a bhakta or devotee has been a channel of uplift for many souls. He was one of those few who saw, at an early hour, the degeneration that had begun to corrupt and kill the Adyar T.S., and did what he could to save it from the decay caused by psychism and spiritual degradation. For some years past he has been unable to do public lecturing work on account of old age and other causes; it was a happy occasion to see him once again ascend the lecture platform to serve the new generation of true students of Theosophy whose spiritual home is the Bombay U.L.T.”

In the August 1936 issue the news of his passing was shared under the heading “PANDIT BHAWANI SHANKAR”:

“With deep regret we have to chronicle the passing of our good friend Pandit Bhawani Shankar on the Full Moon day of the Hindu month of Ashadha – the 4th of July. Born in August 1859, he was seventy-seven years of age, active to the last in the regular performance of his Tapas and ever ready to help and instruct his fellow men. H. P. B. landed in Bombay in February 1879 and not long after Bhawani Shankar came, a young man of twenty, and put himself under her guidance. On several occasions he was among those who saw the Masters and when doubts arose in some and attacks were made against H. P. B. he had the courage to make the following public declaration.

““Many sceptics having rashly and ignorantly denied the existence of the so called “Himalayan Brothers,” I am provoked by a sense of duty to declare solemnly that such assertions are false. For, I have seen the Brothers not once, but numerous times in and near the headquarters in bright moonlight. I have heard them talk to our respected Madame Blavatsky, and have seen them delivering important messages in connection with the work of the Theosophical Society, whose progress they have condescended to watch. They are not disembodied spirits, as the Spiritualists would force us to believe, but living men. I was on seeing them neither hallucinated nor entranced; for there are other deserving fellows of our Society who had the honour to see them with me, and who could verify my statements. And this, once for all, is the answer that I, as a Theosophist and Hindu Brahmin, give to disbelievers, viz., that these Brothers are not mere fictions of our respectable Madame Blavatsky’s imagination, but real personages, whose existence to us is not a matter of mere belief, but of actual knowledge. BHAWANISHANKAR GANESH MULLAPOORCAR”

“In more than one place the Masters referred to him and below we print but two short statements both made by Mahatma K. H. :–

““Bhavani Shanker is with O. and he is stronger and fitter in many a way more than Damodar or even our mutual “female” friend.”

““Bhavani Shanker has seen me in my own physical body and he can point out the way to others. He has been working unselfishly for his fellowmen through the T. S. and he is having his reward though he may not always notice it.”

“After the departure of H. P. B. and Damodar from India in 1885 he took earnestly to the study of the Gita which became his text-book for Theosophical exposition. Up and down the vast peninsula Bhawani Shankar travelled from 1891-1909. Serious differences with the Adyar leaders resulted in his limiting his service to small groups of independent students who needed him and welcomed him.

“After the formation of the U. L. T. in Bombay he very soon recognized that the real Theosophical Work was being carried on and under its auspices gave a series of talks in October 1931, September 1932 and September 1933.

“He participated in White Lotus Day meetings of the Bombay U. L. T. – the last occasion was in 1934. Soon after he went North and never returned to this city. The U. L. T. has lost a good and valued friend in the passing of this great Devotee.”

In our article The Occult Life of B. P. Wadia we mentioned the following:

“From Dallas Tenbroeck we learn that at some point following Mr Wadia’s joining of the ULT, Bhavani Shankar “was living temporarily at Versova (north of Bombay, near Juhu beach, where the Wadias had been given land in part payment for their services as ship-builders many years before, by the British East India Company). BPW was invited to come and to attend the Pandit’s “morning puja” – a period which he spent in meditation and devotion with thought centered on HPB and the Masters. This, BPW said, began at 4.00 a.m. and would continue for a period of 4 to 5 hours. Bhawani Shankar used at that time a special bell. It had a “peculiar, a curious ring to it” which “produced a deep psychological effect on those who heard it.”

“Further: “At the time of his death, Bhawani Shankar asked B. P. Wadia to come and visit him. He apparently delayed that event until his arrival. They had a private talk, after which he expired. The date was the Full Moon of the month of Ashadha – the 4th of July 1936. Born in 1859, Bhawani Shankar was 77 years old, and, active to the last, was ever ready to help and instruct his fellows.”

“One may conclude that the closeness and nature of the relation and contact between Mr Wadia and Mr Shankar is further indication as to Mr Wadia’s own occult status and connection with the Great Ones.”

Those who know of and appreciate Bhavani Shankar will be heartened to learn that “The Doctrine of The Bhagavad Gita” is not the only record of his talks which has been preserved.
B. P. Wadia started and edited “The Aryan Path” magazine, a socio-cultural journal with a Theosophical basis, “Aryan” of course being used in its original and ancient meaning of “Noble,” and a total of nineteen articles appeared in it between 1930-1934 signed by “B.M.” As shown above, these were Bhavani Shankar’s initials, for Bhavanishankar was actually his first name and his surname was Mullapoorcar. It was further confirmed to us a few years ago by the Bangalore ULT in India that these were indeed authored by this same Bhavani Shankar.

Each article was prefaced with the following:

“B.M. is an old-world man living by his old-world methods in our era. We are fortunate in having secured a few reports of his talks to his intimate friends. The Bhagavad-Gita is the book he has mastered through long years of study and meditation; but further, having lived according to its tenets more successfully than is generally possible, his thoughts breathe a peculiar fragrance. The papers have been translated from the vernacular; it should be understood that they are not literal translations, and the translator has adhered more to ideas and principles than to words. Although B.M. knows English, his inspiration becomes impeded in employing that medium of expression and so he prefers not to use it. We think our readers will find real inspiration in this series.”

The titles of these “reports of his talks” were: “The Great Hunger” (January 1930), “The Power of Passion” (February 1930), “Spiritual Democracy” (March 1930), “Shall We Become Civilized?” (April 1930), “The Right Resolve” (June 1930), “The Unbridled Tongue” (July 1930), “Who, Where, What is God?” (August 1930), “Where To Begin?” (September 1930), “Self, The Disciplinarian” (October 1930), “The Nature of the Lower Self” (February 1931), “To Which Class Do You Belong?” (March 1931), “Heaven and Hell” (April 1931), “Renunciation – True and False” (December 1931), “The Family” (February 1933), “On Hearing” (May 1933), “The Wise One” (July 1933), “The Work of the Aspirant” (October 1933), “Kindling The Fire” (May 1934), “The Structure of The Mind” (November 1934).

In this present article, these are now all published online and made widely available for the first time, thanks in part to the work and efforts of a ULT associate in Chile, South America.

One will not find complex metaphysical theory or disclosure of esoteric mysteries in these talks/articles. Those do have their place and can be found above all in the writings of H. P. Blavatsky, some of which are quoted from here by Bhavani Shankar. But these talks/articles are straightforward, practical, and speak largely to the heart, and are sure to bring some fresh inspiration and impetus to students of the Theosophical teachings.

~ * ~
THE GREAT HUNGER
(January 1930)
“The hungry man loseth sight of every other object but the gratification of his appetite, and when he is become acquainted with the Supreme, he loseth all taste for objects of whatever kind.” – Bhagavad-Gita, II. 59.

To hunger and thirst after righteousness, which our Christian brethren ought to do, following the advice of their teachers, was advocated many centuries earlier by the Gita. Food, either for the body, or mind or soul is the necessary basis–upadhi for experience, and the relish of food is dependent upon hunger and thirst. Over-eating is the order of this day and the beauty and utility of hunger are unknown among the well-to-do. It looks as if in former Yugas when Plenty blessed this land our own ancestors forgot to practise the rules of fasting. So Karma has overtaken people and to-day Poverty stalks the land. Our future would be more glorious than our past if our millions were taught the beneficent influence of adversity; and who can do this save our well-to-do and educated leaders? But most of them are educated in western ways and have forgotten the wisdom of their fathers, and their physical wealth increases their moral and spiritual poverty. Our India is trampled under foot not so much by foreigners as by her own sons, and in our daily personal lives we degrade her almost every hour. Not until we take to high-thinking which purifies us from our petty meanness, small selfishnesses, constant immoralities, will India be really free. Our educated men and women, our natural leaders, will err in administration and in advice just as the British rulers blunder and give wrong advice, because they are beset with blemishes which result from false views of life, of state, of progress.

It is the individual who reforms himself who will be able to reform others; he who rules himself, and he alone, is fit to govern the destinies of masses. The blind are leading the blind in most countries. The very measure of physical wealth and economic prosperity whereby countries are regarded as great or backward is false. If India does not get away from that basis of thought she will suffer, as rich and influential western states are suffering.

Just as food is the basis of life on the economic plane, so Knowledge is the basis on the plane of soul. There are poisons which kill the soul, there are intoxicants which madden the soul, there are foods which nourish the soul. There are systems of thought which produce actions that kill the soul, and living men become dead units. There are millions in this land who are soul-less. Lust produces sex perversions (birth-control is one of them), anger produces hatred (communalism is a species of it), greed produces selfishness (family law-suits are an example) and these tend to poison the soul. All intoxicants are poisonous and slowly lessen the power of the soul in the body.

Soul-nourishment must be sought and we must hunger and thirst after it. Soul-knowledge is desired when lust and anger and greed do not disturb. Most men are not aware of the sweets and high pleasures of soul-knowledge, as the eater of dogs who never tasted fruits knows not its lusciousness. Once the fruit is tasted and its juice currents mingle in our blood the hunger for it begins. Intuitively all men long for soul-contentment and soul-growth, because in golden ages of the past the impress of wisdom was burnt into them by the Compassionate Ones. Now, darkness envelops us, for this is the dark age, Kali Yuga; and soul-knowledge changes decade by decade – candle light, oil-light, gas-light, electric light, because there is no Sun.

This innate desire for spiritual life leads people in wrong paths, because they mistake the part for the whole and the semblance for the reality. But in this verse Master Krishna gives one word, the Supreme, which the hungry soul needs. The most objectionable feature of orthodox religions is the false and unspiritual view of Deity. Spirit is materialized, God is carnalized and egotism enlarges the shadow of the cruel task-master which it fears. Such is the magic of Maya!

Supreme, Param, is described at length in this chapter – the one impartite, omnipresent Self, which is the Source and Soul of every creature. The Inner Ruler in the heart of each is the King of Kings, and it is the knowledge about It, the science of Its emanations, the philosophy of Its permeation, for which we must hunger and thirst.

In a famine-stricken land people eat whatever comes; so it is now. Carrion, strewn all around, is near at hand and people devour it. Rather that we die than pollute the shrine of the Soul! False ways which look like short-cuts are impulsively taken. Dangerous practices which sound easy are ignorantly adopted. False knowledge is accepted because it sounds plausible, – for example, the craze for worship of the dead called Spiritualism.

The effort to know what the soul is, as taught by the Knowers of the Self – that is the first step. There are hungers and hungers, but we must hunger after the Self within and It will guide us to the food It verily needs. The Gita answers both questions – what is the soul? what is soul-nourishment? – and as we shall see later, it expounds in detail how that nourishment should be absorbed and assimilated.

First then, let us hunger and thirst after the Soul within.

THE POWER OF PASSION
(February 1930)
“As the flame is surrounded by smoke, and a mirror by rust, and as the womb envelopes the foetus, so is the universe surrounded by passion.” – Bhagavad-Gita, III. 38.

The mighty magic of prakriti or nature expresses itself in and by the law of contrast. Light and Darkness are the world’s eternal ways. In us mortals also that duality works, and as a result we have two natures, the higher god-like and the lower demoniacal.

Those of us who are courageous enough to face our own minds know that every time in such a process we are made aware of the existence of our asuric or devilish disposition; the more vigorous the examination, the more appalling the vision of ourselves as embodied devils. This begets despondency.

We muster courage and gird up our loins to fight, taking a solemn resolve not to err in the sphere of passion, not to lapse into anger, not to slide down into avarice. Then real troubles begin and we say with St. Paul: “What I would, that do I not, but what I hate, that do I.” (Romans, VII, 15).

This is the state of Arjuna, the strong armed striver after perfection, when he asks of his Guru Krishna: “By what, O Varshnaya, is man propelled to commit offences, seemingly against his will and as if constrained by some secret force?” This secret force, he is told by his Master, is Kama-Passion – the enemy of man on earth, the first of the three gates to Hell.

Our knowledge and discrimination are most of the time vitiated by this passion. On the other hand it is the energizer of our senses and organs of bodily action. Its subtle influence reaches far and deep, and clouds and deludes the Lord in the body. All these considerations make men wellnigh hopeless and they often give up the good fight. Who can blame them for wanting to retreat from this Kurukshetra, the field of Holy War? It is easier to kill the tiger in the jungle, or overthrow the tyrant  of the state, than to defeat this subtle enemy of the God within our hearts.

But Krishna says that knowing the nature of our Higher Self, the Lord Ishvara, in the heart of each of us, and invoking His aid, and strengthening the lower self by the Higher Self, this foe may be slain. This is the final summation of His discourse on Karma Yoga, the right performance of action. In a single verse the profound answer is given. Its understanding requires meditation, while its application and practice is a question of sustained effort for years.

According to our Shastras, Kamadeva is the son of Dharma and Shraddha–Duty is his father and Faith his mother; and yet he is the tormentor of the Atman in us! Such is his magic and its maya.

Will is born of Kamadeva, it is said. The old Hermetists asserted “Behind will stands desire”; and the Rig Veda Hymn refers to the primal arising of Desire in the unknown First Cause. Translating these metaphysical ideas into terms of the human plane we may say that all our thoughts and feelings, all our resolves and actions proceed from the principle of Passion-Kama in us: some are of the nature of lust and low passion, others of love and compassion. Lust and love, passion and compassion, all stream forth from but one source. In our delusion we seek for different sources and trace the one to a God, the other to a devil, both outside of us. The source is single, the human heart: one stream goes upwards and compassion, knowledge and thoughtful action result; the other downwards to manufacture lust, gluttony and avarice. Our past thoughts and feelings and will-resolves produce in us the manifestation of Ahura-Mazda as also of Ahriman: Suras and Asuras are both produced in us and by us.

There are two kinds of desires in us, the higher and the lower. Who is not familiar with the lower? Not many know the nature and working of the higher.

The passion-principle of Kama is the central one in the human constitution. The Higher Self with its discriminating and thinking faculties is the spiritual triad in man; the personal man with his body and the energy or vitality – prana – is the second triad. Between these two is Kama; there is desire in and of the higher, as there is desire in and of the lower triad. The senses and sense-organs are the instruments of the lower desires; the discerning intuition and the thinking mind are the instruments of the higher.

When an individual has more of the lower desires than the higher, and when he gives way to them, he is seen as an evil man; when the higher desires show themselves we have a good and noble person. In most people there is the mixture of good and evil, and it is so persistent that it is taken as natural and therefore unalterable. This is due to lack of knowledge about ourselves, about the seat of both kinds of desires in us, and about how these desires go round unceasingly until the laws of our and their beings are in some measure understood.

It is said that the higher passions are three: (1) Desire for the Wisdom about the Divine Self in each; (2) Desire for the company of Holy Men, that is, those who are the possessors of such Wisdom; and (3) Desire to apply the Teachings of that Wisdom to ourselves in daily living. The starting point in reforming ourselves lies in arousing one or more of these higher passions. We need not wait for them to come to birth naturally; we must strive to awaken them.

Without knowledge no warfare can be carried on successfully; this greatest of all wars, the one in which we want to fight and demolish our moral and mental pravity requires precise knowledge. The Gita gives that knowledge, and so its study is necessary.

SPIRITUAL DEMOCRACY
(March 1930)
“Even if thou art the greatest of all sinners, thou shalt be able to cross over all sins in the bark of spiritual knowledge.” – Bhagavad-Gita, IV, 36.

This is the most enheartening promise which the Gita offers. As Shri Krishna typifies the perfected soul or Mahatma, this assurance coming from such divine lips ought to be considered by us all seriously. Earlier in the same fourth discourse, He refers to the four castes, and He also gives us a glimpse into the nature of those who have transcended all castes and conditions, including Himself. Therefore, when He follows it up with this plain unequivocal statement it is a matter of rejoicing – nay more, a subject for meditation. For most of us in reality belong to one caste or another; there are many Iyengars and Iyers, many Pandits and Shastris, who in reality are untouchable pariahs, because of the grossness of their conduct, their pride, and their cruelty; on the other hand, among the despised Panchamas are pure-minded, humble and even wise individuals, who in reality are Brahmanas. There are Kshattriyas among Parsis, Muslims and Christians. In every country there are Shudras and in every nation there are Vaishyas. Emancipated Mahatmas are not the product of India alone; They flower in every clime.

The Gita gives the above assurance to all sinners – wherever they may be, whoever they may be. Here is a statement of Spiritual Democracy. Krishna, like the Buddha, like all Mahatmas, is not a political but a spiritual Democrat – a lover and server of all souls. Upali, the barber, was received in His Sangha by Gotama in answer to his question: “Is Nirvana for such as I?” For all, for every one of us, there is the possibility of overcoming sins.

But note one condition. Shri Krishna does not say: “Go on sinning and I will take you onward to the Supreme Place.” There is no forgiveness of our sins by others; what a hopeless task it would be for any one of us, who is poor of labours under the vow of poverty, if we depended upon a purohit, a qazi, a dastur, or a cardinal, for the forgiveness of our sins! Not even a Krishna or a Christ can save us. The Mahatmas can but point the way. In the above shloka, the way is shown: “Cross in the bark of spiritual knowledge.” We are told that “every nation without exception is comprehended in spiritual knowledge,” and the injunction is for us “to seek the Wisdom.”

If it is for all, and if every action can be evaluated in terms of the Wisdom, it is clear that we need not become sannyasis, faqirs, bikkhus and monks and don the cloak of orange, of yellow, or of black. It is not a matter of growing hair as faqirs and sannyasis do, or of shaving as with Buddhist monks and Christian. It is not any forced outer observance, but the inner perception and understanding which enable any of us  to turn our back on sin. Mere wish and desire to grow in wisdom and purity is of little value; when the wish becomes a solemn resolve, and the desire is transformed into acts of will we begin to tread the Path which takes us to Mahatmas and to Mahatmahood.

What is meant by the bark of spiritual knowledge? How should we get hold of it? It is not purchasable, nor do the Gods bestow it as a gift. Krishna does not leave us stranded with only a solemn assurance. He lays down very definite steps whereby the search for wisdom should be pursued.

Wisdom is defined as the supreme purifier and it spontaneously springs up in the man who is perfected in Yoga, union with his own Higher Self. But as that is the summation and end of our life-unfoldment, what are the steps leading thereto?What shall we do to bring about that spontaneity? What, to move in the direction of complete union with the Spirit of our being? We are given a triple remedy: (1) Obeisance, (2) Enquiry, (3) Service.

Humble approach to the Path is needful: not coming to it in all the pride of possession, but full of the chastening power of poverty. In leaving behind worldly wisdom we acquire the higher innocence which recognizes that head-learning without soul-wisdom is dangerous to head and soul alike. This stage the Christian Mystics described when they said: Naked follow the naked Jesus.

Enquiry and questioning and search must be strong. For the mentally lazy the Science of Life must remain a riddle. Mind is the most valuable possession of man; coming under the dominance of the senses it slays the Real, but controlling the senses enables it to be controlled by the Spirit who is the real Man; thus mind gains illumination and learns the truths about the reality of things.

Service is the service of the One Self. The God in us is also the God in each and so our emancipation implies freedom from the bondage of all. It is the service of all – saint and sinner alike. No Mahatma can be served save by the service of those whom He serves. But it is the service of the Soul, not the body of the soul, nor its mind, nor any other aspect thereof. It means that in every service rendered the place and power of the Soul should be taken into account. When we feed or clothe the body of a brother without thinking of the Soul, we but render partial service, and often do wrong having set out to do right. When we nourish his mind without due regard to the Soul we may retard his true progress, and often hurl him to hell while our intention was to waft him to heaven.

Humility, questioning, service are to be practised simultaneously. A little of each every day – self-control, spiritual study, soul-sacrifice practised every day will bring triumph in the process of time. Thus we too who are sinful will cross over to the other shore. But all the time we shall have to bear in mid that “the pivotal doctrine of the Esoteric philosophy admits no privileges or special gifts in man, save those won by his own Ego through personal effort and merit throughout a long series of metempsychoses and reincarnations.”