TO WHICH CLASS DO YOU BELONG?
(March 1931)
“Those who have the eye of wisdom perceive the Spirit, and devotees who industriously strive to do so see it dwelling in their own hearts; whilst those who have not overcome themselves, who are devoid of discrimination, see it not even though they strive thereafter.” – Bhagavad-Gita, XV. 11-12.

Our humanity is composed of three classes of intelligences. First, those who not attempting control of the lower tendencies are devoid of discrimination and do not discern the spiritual aspect of their own beings. Second, those who strive to establish a unison between themselves and their higher and divine nature, having perceived that Spirit resides in their own hearts. Third, the wise who have successfully overcome the attributes of matter by knowledge, and see the things of the flesh with the single eye of Spirit.

In this era things of the senses sway the minds of people enormously. All inventions and devices of modern science are undertaken to bestow comforts and conveniences on the body and bodily senses, to energize brain and the lower intelligence. The very existence of Soul is doubted, and certainly no attention is considered fit to be given to man’s higher nature. Our school-instruction and our home-culture emphasise more the spirit of competition and ambition in us than the subdual of the lower tendencies. Therefore, very large numbers of people grow up in the belief that selfishness is necessary to advancement. There is much of unselfishness of a kind abroad: people are good and charitable and helpful to their neighbours, when to act thus does not inconvenience themselves. The rich give out of the abundance of their wealth, and such giving does not cost them any privation or even discomfort. It is natural, therefore, that in our civilization the first class of beings abound. The agencies to arouse them, to help them put their feet on the path leading to the second stage are very few. In ancient days temples and other religious institutes worked assiduously in this direction; now religious organizations may encourage superstition and blind belief or social service and vague hope, but ignorance prevails about spiritual verities and their scientific practice. This being the age of individualism par excellence, it devolves on the individual to take himself in hand. The economic pressure has compelled him to become competitive and ambitious, but even great suffering has not succeeded in arousing many to question the meaning and purpose of life.

Yet, there is a sufficient number of people who have begun the Search. The phenomenal side of Spiritual life is alluring many among them. Philosophy which requires mental alertness and leads to the exposure of intellectual dishonesty is not popular. Such movements as Spiritualism of the western sort, and the other brand of eastern mediumism and worship of the dead, Couéism and species of New Thought and Christian Science are gullibly accepted. There is much straying away from the discipline of the Secret Knowledge, Guhya Vidya of the Gita, in following some person who claims to have acquired emancipation or gained initiation! The virtues of this stage of human evolution are well defined – industrious striving after the realization of the Higher Self which is within each of us. Such striving consists of study about the nature of the Higher Self, application in daily life to live as that Self, and promulgation of the ideas about it for the benefit of others. Study, practice, service take us to tread the triple path of Knowledge–Gnyan, Devotion–Bhakti, and Sacrifice–Karma. Each human soul must learn and teach, must devotedly apply and practise, must sacrificingly serve the race as a whole.

Lives of constant endeavour bring us the grand consummation – realization of the Self in us as the Universal Self; man has become God, the Mahatma is born, most difficult to find, as the Gita teaches. He is the true Seer; not the so-called clairvoyant who sees invisible things, but one who understands all that is seen not by senses but by the mind purified of all dross and having acquired the intuitive perception. All Sages and Mahatmas have the Single Eye; having learnt to see straight, each sees the truth underlying all, and thus the One Truth. They are all of one mind, one will, one vision.

Let us overcome ourselves; our lusts and appetites, our cravings and avarice, our selfishness and egotism have to be subdued. We have to gain some impersonality in dealing with the events of life, some universal vision which would endow reality to every-day occurrences. This requires knowledge – study of true books, Holy Writ indeed, and among such the Gita takes a prominent place.

HEAVEN AND HELL
(April 1931)
“The gates of hell are three – desire, anger, covetousness, which destroy the Soul; wherefore one should abandon them.” – Bhagavad-Gita, XVI. 21.

The ancients knew what we moderns are beginning to believe, that heaven and hell, Svarga and Naraka, are in ourselves. Religions have distorted the old truth and have made heaven and hell distant localities, instead of states of human consciousness, which they are. The Soul’s imprisonment and its deliverance do not depend upon movements in material space, but upon motions in spiritual space i.e. on elevating or lowering the ideation inherent in our own consciousness.

When a man is in the slough of jealousy or despondency he is in hell; when his thoughts soar to visualise selflessness and compassion he is in heaven. The great Buddha reiterated the fact that this earth is the lowest of hells that our humanity touches. After-death conditions for most men who die natural deaths are pleasanter than are experiences in embodied life. We suffer here, and dying naturally enjoy the reward of virtues practised, and are compensated for suffering according to the merit of each. It is the intuitive perception of this truth on the part of mankind which is responsible for the belief that death makes all men holy and pure. Death does not transform a sinner into a saint; but deprived of the possibility of committing fresh sins, he gets his due from the compassionate law of Karma, in such rest as he has himself merited.

These reflections will lead the student to perceive that each one is here and now in heaven or hell, according to the state of his thought-feelings. Our moods which come and go are but visible expressions of the inner states of our thought-feelings. In the same city dwell demoniacal beings and Divine Mahatmas; in the same village are to be found the idle and the industrious; in the same family one is selfish and another thoughtful of all; nay, in the same breast surge the cruelty that destroys and the courage that succours. It is true that “each man his prison makes.”

After death the state of the Soul is a continuation of its state as an incarnate being.

And yet each one of us should literally dread the hell-fire; most are ignorant that they are very near to it, and many burning in that pit are unaware of that fact.

The impure and wicked will not go to hell, they are in it. That is why they do not know the nature of action nor of cessation from action. The untruthful man is in hell already and his punishment begins the moment he is found out, and even before! Those who deny the existence of Soul or the Spiritual nature of this universe are in a hell of their own; and some such who are dependent on their corpus of flesh and blood and nothing higher and who advocate and practise sense and sex “enjoyment,” die in hell, to be reborn here in hell again – “with natures perverted, enemies of the world they are born to destroy.”

This sounds gruesome, because the idea is presented with some directness. Ponder over it in the light of the teachings of the Gita and its accuracy will not be denied.

There arise the practical questions – how to get out of the hell in which one may find oneself, and also what would keep a man from falling over the precipice into a fresh hell?

Krishna definitely states that there are three gates which lead us into hell: Kama–Passion, Krodha–Anger and Lobha–Greed. If we learn how to avoid these three we have turned our face heavenward. All mortals are afflicted, in small measure or great, with these three; without exception for any and every one these cause pain and suffering, in due course. We name pain and suffering as hell – they are not, for they are at once punitive and purgative. We are not in hell when we suffer from our lust and anger and avarice; we have passed out of hell into purgatory. We are in hell when we are lustful and angry and greedy. Hell’s one characteristic is its power to cause forgetfulness, loss of memory, and the man in hell knows not that he is there. He is stunned by the blow which his own lust and anger and greed have given him; when he comes to life, that is, remembers his crime, he is out of hell.

Memory, then, plays a very important role. If we can always remember; if we do not lose our power to recollect; if every time we near the cause of passion-power-pelf we collect ourselves and exclaim “Get thee behind me,” then in that process we purge ourselves and are ready to experience something heavenly.

Our deeds flow from our thoughts and feelings; the strength of will manifests according to the power of our thoughts and feelings; our motive is the hidden spring of our ideas and emotions. Therefore, we must begin there – we must question the motive of every thought-feeling, every word, every deed. Selfishness of motive is the outcome of dwelling on petty, mean, low, commonplace thoughts. Such increase egotism and selfishness. As we dwell on great and noble thoughts, impersonal feelings, universal ideas, a new force energises us, and this purifies our motives, gives them a new tone, a new direction. This leads to an inner conversion, and our outer life expresses the change for the better. Thus a man leaves hell behind, and entering heaven makes of earth a new place – no more a wilderness but a veritable Garden of Eden.

RENUNCIATION – TRUE AND FALSE
(December 1931)
“Deeds of sacrifice, of mortification, and of charity are not to be abandoned, for they are proper to be performed, and are the purifiers of the wise. But even those works are to be performed after having renounced all selfish interest in them and in their fruits; this, O son of Pritha, is my ultimate and supreme decision.” –Bhagavad-Gita, XVIII, 5-6.

The intuitive response to the appeal of the Higher Life is natural to man. But for every one man who proceeds on this greatest of all ventures on a basis of knowledge, there are hundreds who fall a prey to the lures which beset the old and narrow way sharp as the edge of the razor. There are millions who are known as Sannyasis and Tyagis. There are rare units who are really such.

The Master Krishna makes it abundantly clear that whatever we may be doing, we find ourselves performing works. And yet the Gita is the book par excellence which treats on of Sannyasa–Renunciation; it is sometimes called the Book of Karma-Yoga, union with the Higher Self through deeds; but more truly it may be called the Book of Renunciation, for it advocates renunciation as the highest form of action and teaches how man – not some particular caste man, but every man – should renounce.

Whatever one’s condition of life, a man is called upon to do every day three kinds of deeds – Yagna–Sacrifice, Tapas–Mortification, Dana–Charity. These three should never be disregarded. They purify the whole man.

Living in a competitive world, with cares and worries meeting us at every turn, how can a man even remember to perform regularly some work which is sacrificial, some which is mortifying, and some which is charitable?

The Gita does not offer these as spiritual luxuries, which the privileged few alone may indulge in; they are regarded as necessities of soul-life, which no human being can set aside without psychic and spiritual peril to himself. And further, in one single, straightforward injunction it says that even these acts of sacrifice, mortification and charity “are to be performed after having renounced all selfish interest in them and in their fruits,” and thus with a majestic and sweeping gesture defines what true charity, austerity and sacrifice are.

But is it right for a man to perform these at the cost of his own congenital and congenial duties? How can a twentieth-century mortal find time or spare energy for these deeds of Krishna, when all his forces and resources are exhausted in doing his own natural duties? This question does not arise for the student of the Gita; for he clearly perceives that, in the very performance of the natural duties, in the very environment of each, are ample opportunities to be found to sacrifice joyously, to practise self-control and to be charitable on more planes than that of economics alone.

It is the very doing of our duties, but with a new attitude, which the Gita teaches. It lays down certain fundamental principles. Let us look at them.

Necessary and obligatory works should be performed – such are duties. That which is not necessary for us to perform, that which is not obligatory, that which is not due from us to nature or to man is not duty. In the performance of such deeds of duties two ideas should be borne in mind. We should not abstain from works through bodily propensity, saying: “It is painful,” any more than indulge in acts because the pleasurable feeling tempts us in their direction. Thus, the motive and the desire for the fruits of works have to be thought about. Not the renunciation of necessary duties; but the renunciation of the fruit of all obligatory actions, performed without attachment, because they ought to be done; herein is described renunciation, false and true.

Thus those who desire to lead the Spiritual life have to seek opportunities in their own environment for practising sacrifice, self-control and charity. They will not have far to go. Near at hand, in their own circumstances, in a very short while, they will find more than ample scope for the fulfillment of their wishes. In the home, in the market-place, in public life, hundreds of opportunities arise, and arise constantly, to do the triple deed, dear to the heart of the Mahatma, the perfect performer of perfect deeds.

However difficult this practice of sacrifice, austerity and charity, in daily life, the nature of what is expected of us is easily understandable. One has only to look within at one’s self and around at his kin, friends and fellows, and it does not require much thought to learn how we can be sacrificing, how we can mortify our lower characteristics, and how we can be charitable in thought and feeling, in words and works.

To guide us in complexities which must arise, the Gita defines what is correct and incorrect yagna, tapas, and dana.

That sacrifice which violates not the laws of Nature and is in consonance with some understanding of those laws, when done without expectation of any reward and with the conviction that it is necessary to be done, is correct and beneficent. Sacrifices done with an eye to reward and esteem, or as an ostentation for piety, are not spiritual, though they are better than those which are not according to the precepts of Bodhi-dharma, Wisdom-Religion, the Science of the Self or Atma-Vidya, and which are undertaken without any conviction.

Contemplating with reverence the laws of and processes in Nature; esteeming the beneficent deeds of holy men and sages with a view to emulate them; purifying ourselves so that rectitude, chastity and harmlessness are practised; – these constitute right mortification or austerity of the body. Speech which is gentle, true and friendly and which results from diligence in the reading of the records of the Wise – that is mortification of speech. Serenity, mildness of temper, silence, self-restraint, absolute straightforwardness in conduct are called tapas or mortification of mind.

And last – Dana, Charity: gifts of knowledge or wealth which are bestowed at the proper time on the proper person, and by men who are not desirous of a return, comprise true charity. And whatever is given should be bestowed with proper attention, without a feeling of superiority or scorn. In the giving of gifts we should avoid calculating what spiritual or other benefit may accrue to us from such giving, also avoid making any gift reluctantly or half-heartedly; but above all turn away from the temptation of gifts given out of place and season and to unworthy persons, even though they be friends or relatives.

Here is the basis of the true religion of works, which purifies the mind, ennobles the conduct, and which, the Gita says, is possible for any earnest soul to practise; for it enables a man to discharge his duties and fulfill his obligations without running away from the station in life in which his own aspirations, deeds and misdeeds have placed him.

THE FAMILY
(February 1933)
“From the influence of impiety the females of a family grow vicious; and from women that are become vicious arises the confusion of castes.” – Bhagavad-Gita, I, 41.

Such is the reason Arjuna advances to Krishna in the very first chapter; he explains his argument in subsequent verses. Not as an excuse for his timidity does Arjuna wear the mask of a philosopher. Hero of a thousand battles, not a trace of cowardice remained in his blood. What was his argument? He who disturbs the peace of the family precipitates the destruction of the family. Such disturbance of family life (Kula-dharma) culminates in the loss of virtue of the women of that family; this, in its turn, shakes the very foundations of society, because the vicious woman becomes the womb of outcaste. Once the family dharma – laws which uphold and sustain the family – is disregarded, the larger unit, the society, is corrupted.

Arjuna reasons: If he and his brothers disturb the peace of the family even though their own relatives were evil, were over-throwing justice and torturing righteousness, they themselves would be responsible for the ultimate destruction of the whole kingdom. Where was the glory and what was the good of ruling over a people who would be casteless?

Now, the Gita is a book of many meanings and many messages: its metaphysics and philosophy tell the story of the macrocosm, its psychology that of the microcosm; it is history concerned with weak humans, and myth concerned with mighty gods; above all it teaches the Secret Science, i.e., the Science of the Soul; and how? As the hidden soul in man unfolds, it hears message after message hidden in this Song of Life.

Therefore Kula-dharma, family-life, and corruption of women, and the arising of caste confusion – all have different meanings. Thus, there is the psychological confusion of caste in most men of to-day, for their inner aspirations do not harmonize with their desires and cause confusion in body and brain. Each one of us is male-female. Just as in the body of every male the female exists in latency and vice versa, so also in our minds and morals, we may be male or female or both – generally both. There is a whole male line of evolution, and there is another, the female line; both these mix and mingle in the human being.

Celibacy which chelas of real Gurus are called upon to practise extends to all states of consciousness; there is mental celibacy, there is emotional chastity, there is psychic virginity, there is noetic continence, and so forth; and without these the legitimate and healthy birth of intuition cannot result. Each human being is a family in himself, and each one has to observe his own family-dharma within himself. Corruption of this particular family-dharma begets its own confusion; on the other hand, its correct observance begets the Deathless Race of Immortals. So there are different ways in which this as all other Gita doctrines can be interpreted. The soul, through its progressive awakenings, obtains one key and then another, which enables it to perceive these interpretations.

But let us consider the society around us in the light of this principle. Caste-destruction did take place and confusion ensued: India is said to be caste-ridden; it is with false castes. For 5000 years now the colours (varna) of our peoples have become mixed; for 5000 years on this sacred soil the confusion of castes has flourished, dragging India down and down. It is notable that Krishna did not answer, did not even consider, the specific objection Arjuna raised. He began with most lofty ideas, metaphysical and ethical; and when he came to speak of castes, He mentioned Karma–effects of Gunas–qualities, according to which the colours (varna) of men’s characters and dispositions show themselves, life after life.  Moreover, caste confusion prevails all over the world, and not only in our India.

Caste-confusion is the outstanding mark of the Kaliyuga, the cycle inaugurated by Krishna. It will persist among the masses of mankind who belong to Kali-yuga. That confusion will continue to disturb family-life (Kula-dharma), will continue to corrupt the morals of womankind, and will ultimately compel people  to doubt their own ways, their reasonings, themselves even, and then set them thinking. This is what is happening in our midst, but not on any large scale, because sex evil is almost universal, and more, it is not even looked upon as evil but it is considered to be a natural phenomenon. Corrupt family life of this age is the direct outcome of sex evil.

Why did Krishna inaugurate such an era? To give direction to human evolution. Teachers and Revelations (Rishis and Shastras) help men in earlier cycles; through obedience and belief they grow; they are helped by Nature, as the infant is fed by the mother; the impulse given by Divine Incarnations and Holy Books carries them along. When that is withdrawn good living becomes mechanical and would disappear producing a greater chaos than even now exists, if Krishna did not set into motion His own wheel. The aim of Krishna then was to help men to live by conviction and not by belief. Not to allow the complete obliteration of the work of the previous Incarnations did Krishna come, but to sustain Their labour in the only right way open to Him, viz., to make men rely on the impacts within themselves, impacts received by them from Teachers and Revelations. That is why Krishna is considered the most important of the avataras of Vishnu. Living in bliss within themselves, living at peace with all, people did not know for themselves what Light was. Shadows became necessary; a dark-cycle, Kali-yuga, became due; and Krishna ushered in that new era.

The second outstanding mark of this Iron Age is individualism. The way of growth is individualistic. Why? Because each man has to make his own effort, unaided by any one, save by that which he has acquired and which is within himself. Each man, each woman must remove his or her own caste-confusion, by re-establishing his or her own family-dharma.

The way out of the darkness of this age for every individual is through the family-unit. Arjuna’s fear was not unfounded; but Krishna did not come to destroy family-life, Kula-dharma, but to help men and women establish it on the rock of knowledge, so that it can never again become mechanical, never again become a matter of belief, of tradition, of form.

Manu-Smriti, the tradition handed down by Manu, gives the necessary information, but we must practise it intelligently, after due study and understanding.

[NOTE: Manusmriti, better known as The Laws of Manu, is an old Hindu scripture, largely on the subject of domestic life, which has now lost popularity and influence with many Hindus. But this is justifiable, as in its current form it contains many degrading, insulting, offensive remarks about women and their role and character, and is misogynistic and sexist in the extreme. But H. P. Blavatsky asserts that the original Manusmriti was not like this and that its present form is due to the text having been tampered with by the Brahmin priests of orthodox Hinduism. In her article “Misconceptions” she says, “The Brahmins have embellished their laws of Manu in the post-Mahabharatean period. . . . It is wrong to say that these institutions [i.e. various customs and traditions demeaning to women, including the burning of widows] have been established during the reign of Esotericism. It is the loss of the keys to symbolism and to the laws of Manu which has produced all the errors and all the abuses that have infiltrated into Brahmanism. . . . The Brahmins . . . those at least who have remained ultra-orthodox and who fight every benevolent reform – persecute us and hate us as much as do the Christian clergy and the missionaries. We break their idols; they endeavour to smash our reputations and to soil our honour.” So Bhavani Shankar must have been talking about the real Manusmriti, although that is not readily available or accessible to the world today.]

ON HEARING
(May 1933)
श्रोतव्यस्य श्रुतस्य च ||

This expression occurs (Gita II. 52) in Krishna’s exposition of Buddhi Yoga, the method of purifying buddhi, the power of discernment. This buddhi is translated as intellect, mind, heart; but it is a faculty of the lower man and must not be confused with Buddhi of the inner and higher man which Buddhi is a ray of Mahabuddhi, or Mahat, the Universal Mind.

Our understanding-discernment is clouded. Illusion (maya), delusion (moha), ever envelop the man. Buddhi-Yoga frees us from this bondage. Several are the marks of this bondage. Among them is this one – about what is heard and what remains to be heard. But every mark of bondage has within it the power to remove that bondage. The creator of the bondage and the maker of Karma is stronger than the bondage or the Karma.

Sight is regarded as the instrument of perception. Peoples’ beliefs are based on what is seen, and those who believe on hearsay are looked down upon. That is right, for people should not act on hearsay. But to depend on our sight and say “I believe because I see,” is also wrong. All belief is to be discouraged, whether it is due to hearing or to seeing.

Come to knowledge. We find that in modern science, observation, i.e., sight, precedes deduction, theory, and report. When an experimenter’s sight is satisfied he speaks, and on his report other scientists observe, and then the world hears and repeats – “science teaches.” But this is unsatisfactory; for again and again science contradicts itself.

Turn to the world of Maharishis and Mahatmas. Their Divine Science, Brahma-Vidya, describes the evolution of the universe as based on Sound.

According to these Sages, evolution is an unfoldment and a procession, really speaking an unfolding-procession. The order is – Life as basic, immovable and immortal Spirit; then, Life as creative energy (Daiviprakriti); and then Life as ever-breaking, ever-multiplying matter (Mulaprakriti). All three are Life, or Life in three states – the root-states of what we call gaseous, liquid and solid conditions of matter. All that is gaseous corresponds to spirit, all that is liquid corresponds to energy, all that is solid corresponds to matter. Each of these states is a wave of Life in which spirit-beings, energy-beings, matter-beings, emerge as a procession. The differentiating power, that which enables us to cognize the One as three, – and Life cannot be cognized otherwise, – is Sound. Sound-vibration (nada-dhvani), condensing or materializing, forms stars; sound inherent in each orb produces forms belonging to that orb – down to the very atoms. Shabda-Brahman is Word-God, i.e., the universe as a Living-Word. The music of the spheres is a fact; it is heard, not seen.

Again, these old Sages teach that of all our senses, that of hearing unfolded first; the human body evolved the ear as the primary organ; therefore it is said that man hears and should hear before he sees. Adopting the order of Nature these Sages, in Their system of education, put sound before sight – that which is heard before that which is seen.

The Vedas were heard, then repeated, then recorded. It is said that if one wants to understand fully the Vedas, he must hear them. Reading may yield a meaning for the mind, but hearing brings a meaning for buddhi, heart or intellect.

The order to be observed in gaining knowledge is – (1) Hear, (2) Memorize, (3) Contemplate, (4) Understand, and (5) Teach. In our Holy Order these are the five steps. What do we hear? Shruti, Revelation; when that is memorized we have what is called Smriti, Tradition; these two give the subject for, and become the cause of, contemplation; then understanding results; when one has understood through meditation on that which was memorized and heard, then he is to teach; and that fifth step is part of learning. Even understanding is insufficient; when all that is understood is repeated for the benefit of others, then is the gaining of knowledge completed.

When the Sages laid the foundation of Society in ancient and glorious India, They devised numerous rituals; each ceremony was a reminder to mortals, and told them of some spiritual truth. The Thread ceremony dramatized this fact, for during that rite is whispered into the ear of the boy the sacred text which is his subject of meditation and his guide in life. He followed the same order: he heard, memorized, contemplated, understood and taught.

This is the real order. Aspirants must never try to see or understand that which they have not heard. Prying and curiosity are undesirable; to try to see and understand that about which we have not heard, invariably proves fatal; even were it not dangerous, such an habit delays the secure of true knowledge; but it is dangerous, for we come under the influence of foreign evil influences.

The true Gurus have a definite way of training Their chelas. The five steps are purificatory; they cleanse the heart or buddhi, and adjust the vision of the chela. Just as for ordinary seeing the right focusing of the eyes is essential, so also for seeing ideas; the chela must learn the right focusing of his heart, otherwise intuition will not function. This adjustment of inner vision, which enables the chela to see truths, is made through his ear. Those who try to see without prior hearing are deluded psychics. Even when they are successful in rending the visible veil, they do not understand what they see, and what they see is like unto what the poor man whose eyes are out of focus sees. Never attempt to investigate or experiment with the invisible, unless the Guru’s word on the subject has been heard. There is never a new discovery in the realm of knowledge; all intellects discover the same facts and truths; each aspirant has to learn this – in theory first, and then by practice.

There are truths which are already heard and those which are yet to be heard; therefore, this method and these rules do not only apply to aspirants and disciples, but belong to Guruparampara – the whole chain of Gurus. A Rishi is one who having heard the Vedas chants them for the benefit of the world. Some doctrines are already taught to us, others are yet to be taught. We must not allow ourselves to be snared by this pair, any more than by any other pair. How? We must not be proud of what we know, nor be anxious that others shall accept our knowledge; on the other hand, we must not be impatient about what we have still to learn, nor must we attempt to turn another page of the Book of Wisdom. That Book is a Living Book, and its pages turn by themselves for each learner. Our faith in what has been heard and what has been taught is tested through our attitude to what shall be heard, to doctrines yet to be taught. Detachment about gaining Wisdom is a virtue necessary in the practise of Buddhi-Yoga – the Path of Purifying the Heart.

THE WISE ONE
(July 1933)
Unto the Supreme Spirit (Brahman) goeth he who maketh the Supreme Spirit the object of his meditation in performing his actions. – Bhagavad Gita, IV. 24.

This verse ends the description of the Sage (Buddha).

The Buddha is one whose buddhi is lighted by the Light of Gayatri or of Mahachaitanyam, i.e. of the Spiritual Sun hidden in our visible sun. Just as our minds are enlightened by wisdom, so in the course of evolution our intuitive-soul (buddhi) is enlightened by super-wisdom, the soul of wisdom, the secret wisdom, which solves the mystery of the universe. Then man becomes Super-Man or Buddha.

Ordinary knowledge may be compared to prose, but the other is like poetry and song. Gayatri is the spirit of poetry, and real poetry of sound and words is composed by intuitive-souls and is fully grasped by intuition; prose is born of and can be grasped by mind. The true words of any Sage possess poetic rhythm and beauty; to understand that we must feel them.

Again, there is philosophy, which gives us principles and details of what human minds have thought out, and such philosophy helps our mental growth. But there is super-philosophy; the pure intellect (buddhi) reflects within itself Divine Images or Ideas, and such intuitive-souls make a record of them. Such a record of super-philosophy is like a mirror in which Nature reflects herself.

Therefore the Sage (Buddha) is a poet and a philosopher.

Then Buddha is the Aged One – old of Soul, hoary with experience. That experience is so profound that its possessor is able to penetrate directly and simply all problems and phenomena. The child is direct and simple in questioning; the Sage is direct and simple in answering; mental questioning, fretting, doubt, puzzlement, worry exist not in him, and so this Aged One is ever young.

This description of the Sage is in the fourth discourse in which Krishna speaks of the mysterious doctrine of Avataras, Divine Incarnations. In verses 16 to 24 we are given a picture, a description of the Sage whose goal is the Source of Avataras.

Gupta-Vidya, Occultism or Esoteric Philosophy teaches that there are four classes of Jivan-Muktas, Emancipated Beings. All such have overcome Karma, i.e., they need not perform any action, they need not exert themselves, because for them nothing remains to be known or obtained. They know themselves as impartite Universal Beings, and experience the joy within their own consciousness while reposing in the ocean of peace.

Of these four classes of liberated souls there are some who resolve to follow the Path of Krishna, the Path of Avataras; they resolve to descend to earth, and out of their own choice live in bondage for the sake of the race. That kind of a Sage is very rare – he who lives ever awake, ever active. It is said that the idea and ideal of performing Karmas produce the four classes of Jivan-Muktas. Just as by Guna-Karma, qualities of past deeds, the four castes arise in the human kingdom, so also by a similar process four classes of Jivan-Muktas arise. They are: (1) Those who live in Turya – a state of deepest trance; (2) Those who live in Sushupti – highest meditation; (3) Those who live in Svapna – exhilarating dream condition. Then there is the fourth: Those who live in Jagrat –in the waking, active state on earth. This last type of Jivan-Mukta, Free Man, gives up his Impartite State of Turya, his Meditative State of Sushupti, his happy and exhilarating state of Svapna, and assumes the active life of Jagrat. He is the real Living Mahatma. By special discipline and training he fits himself to serve the three worlds throughout Ananta-Yuga, the Boundless Age. In Buddhistic terminology he is called Bodhi-Sattva: he who incarnates in his pure buddhi or intuitive-soul the truths of Adi-Buddha, the Primeval Buddha.

The Sage described in the fourth discourse which deals with the Doctrine of Avataras is the Living Mahatma, who is active for the sake of others. The Path of Krishna, which He says is superior to all other paths, treading which this last class of Sages reach Him, and having attained never never fall, but are ever engaged in revolving His Wheel – that Path one in a million treads. It is of such Mahatmas difficult to find (vii. 19) that Krishna enumerates the qualities.

We who are attempting and learning to walk that Way must use these nine verses. They provide a channel for us who aspire to sense inwardly the nature of the living Mahatma, the Wakeful, Watchful, Active Mahatma. These verses make a Picture, a mental Image; what an idol is to the physical eyes, an object of contemplation and adoration not because of its substance but because of its symbology, that too is this description to the eye of the Soul. Reading these verses, memorizing them, thinking about them, using them to build an image, to paint a picture, to carve an idol, we will glimpse the Spiritual Face and the Lotus Feet of the Living Mahatma.

Let us look at these verses. They deal with action and an actor of a particular kind. Actions bind; actions set free; inaction deludes, inaction enlightens. In the first of these verses, the sixteenth, Krishna says that even bards and poets (काव्य:) who possess insight and intuition are confused as to action-inaction. Therefore Krishna explains the nature and mode of that particular kind of action whose performance produces no bondage, nay more, the Living Mahatma engages himself in such performance. In that performance we are able to feel that no action has been committed. It is effortless action, because it comes easily to us, is natural. When one strains oneself in the doing of a deed it is of the nature of Rajas, the motion of desire.

Now, all actions of the Living Mahatma are such easy, flowing, natural actions, and two characteristics are common to all of them: (1) the action of the Sage is never rooted in desire; (2) the action of the Sage is begun, carried on and ended by the Light of His philosophy and wisdom.

In performing actions day by day we must be guided by this Picture of the Sage, whose hands bless us; whose head creates the thought-dreams which impart knowledge to us; whose heart-meditation rays forth compassion which brings us His Vision; and drawing us into His innermost high trance state, He makes us the gift of gifts – opening our sight for a moment, He makes us behold the Glories and Excellencies of the Temple of the World.

THE WORK OF THE ASPIRANT
(October 1933)
He who while living in the world and before the liberation of the Soul from the body, can resist the impulse arising from desire and anger he is a devotee (yukta) and a happy man.

He who is happy within himself, who is delighted within, who is illuminated within, is a yogi; partaking of the Nature of the Supreme he has attained to Brahma-Nirvana. – Bhagavad-Gita, V. 23-24

These two verses describe the condition of the aspirant-practitioner and of the master who has attained. They are strikingly straightforward. They strike us with their depth and simplicity, with their self-evident truth which study and thought reveal as profound. In them we are told what the source of difficulty for the aspirant is, how and where and when the yoke can be thrown off; and with what virtues the Divine Being and the Divine World shine.

The first verse contains the word yukta (युक्त) and it is differently rendered, and it is necessary to render it differently to bring out the real meaning. This word is used in numerous places in the Gita and like the term dharma is understood appropriately in different places. But unless some meditation is done on the word, irrespective of its context, in every instance, we are apt to gain only partial understanding of the verses in which it appears.

First and foremost the aspirant must be resourceful, which implies both adaptability with existing circumstances and preparation for improving them; then he must have contrivance and expediency requiring simple trick or magical artifice. It further implies an inner steadiness in executing outer action and a condition of balance and harmony.

The street-conjurer and magician and his young assistant perform two phenomena with the rope: one, to show physical skill and control over bodily balance by walking on the rope; the other is the famous though rare rope-trick, in which superphysical forces are used. To acquire that balance mere knowledge of the body and the bodily parts is not sought; a physiologist or an anatomist cannot walk the rope. To produce the other kind of phenomenon, more than one law of super-physics is used and often their manipulation is not acquired knowledge but is an inheritance.

Now, compare the Path of the Spiritual Life to the rope; the person must gain that balance; without it the very treading is not possible. The disappearance and reappearance of the boy in the second phenomenon may be compared to the visible climbing by the aspirant in the world, his disappearance from it during the period of his real training, and then his reappearance as the adept-servant of humanity, when he is acclaimed with shouts of wonder, and laughter, and curiosity and questioning, but rarely with the genuine desire to find out the facts and the truths.

Balance, harmony, is that inner equanimity which the aspirant must develop, and the task must be accomplished while living in the world, for it offers an excellent training ground. The Bala-Yogi, the boy-yogi, is the rarest of occult phenomena; at the end of a long time of incarnations one can be born with the marks of a yogi, all ready and prepared to retire at once from the world and undertake the development of siddhis or divine powers. For most people the struggles of life, and especially the home (grihastha-ashrama) are most excellent. Therefore our verse refers to “living in the world.”

Then the second clause: during incarnation, not after death, can this practice be undertaken. A preta or bhut cannot fight desire and anger, for it is nothing else but a bundle of passions and the Soul is absent; neither in Pitri Loka or Swarga can the exercise be done, for the force to be attacked and endured is absent when man reaches those states. Only here, in the incarnated existence, the complete assemblage takes place, making the spiritual life possible. After death conditions may be compared to the self-imposed truce observed by both the armies of Rama and of Ravana during the nights; only during the day combatants come to grips. In this, however, a very important idea is involved. Spiritual life is not for the man who is but a bhut, a shade, a moving-talking-living rupa but devoid of the qualities of manhood. Also, spiritual life is not possible for the deva, who has not yet left his child-state, who is happy but knows not that he is happy, nor what happiness is. The man of effort and balance (yukta) is called a happy man in this verse. There are forms of yoga (I do not mean hatha-yoga) which bring about the separation of the Soul from the body, before the Soul has learnt why he entered the body, and before he has done his duty by the body and the lower kingdoms in which it is rooted. Happiness (Sukh) for the body is one thing, for the deva-god is another thing, and the happy-man (sukhi-nara) is neither a bhuta nor a deva, but nara-man. The duty and function of Nara-Man (remember it is one of the names of Arjuna, and every Name contains truth which can be learnt by meditation on that Name) is to experience through contact with good and evil that higher happiness which fears not matter and is free from limitations. People who run after inner peace and happiness often sleep while their bodies are awake, sometimes dream during such sleep and fancy that final liberation is obtained. Beware of such people and their fragile talk!

Krishna says, learn to resist and endure and bear with this force born of desire (kama) and anger (krodha). He who aspires to be a yogi must kill out this force which like smoke envelops the man. (cf. iii. 39). He must acknowledge its existence and not ignore it. He must face it and not run away from it. Above all, he must not give way to it saying it also is of the Lord, it also is of Mother Nature.

The conquest of this force with the help of the Soul within brings out the powers of that Soul. Numerous are those powers. A man who enjoys the objects of sense is fearful because in the past he has found out that pain follows, or satiation results. Then there is the creative intelligence which enjoys upliftment and while it feels, it does not know what happiness is or whence; it comes and goes. But the Soul who has fought the force of desire, who knows how to endure its presence, nay to bear with it, giving it time to gain transformation, that Soul knows what real happiness is. He knows that that happiness is not the desire-force, but is within himself; repose and light are its two expressions. The Soul’s centripetal energy is peace and repose; the centrifugal is service and enlightenment of others. Peace of the Mahatmas and the Maharshis becomes visible to us through Their Light. When an aspirant has resisted the impulse of desires and successfully retained his balance he is ready by the help of the great Gurus to know the Light, Peace and Joy of his own divine nature, which is one with the world of Divinity. Such a man is Brahma-Bhuta – an apparition of Brahman, the Messenger of Brahman, the Sage who is devoted to the good of all.

KINDLING THE FIRE
(May 1934)
He who, unattached to the fruit of his actions, performeth such actions as should be done is both a renouncer of action (Sannyasi) and a devotee of right action (Yogi); not he who liveth without kindling sacrificial fire and without ceremonies. – Bhagavad-Gita, VI. 1.

We must have an historical setting for this verse. Its definitions are contrary to those to be found in the ancient record of Shruti, left behind by Sages and Seers. Also in the Smriti, the Persistent Tradition rooted in memory–experience, and in Yoga-Shastras, actual Instructions to aspirants for Sannyasa and Yoga. Literally speaking, the Great Master goes contrary to established accepted definitions. Why?

The first third of the Gita is devoted to and examination of the then existing schools of thought, every one of which suffered from accretions and misinterpretations. The great art of Sannyasa and Yoga had also been corrupted. The synthesis which like a Sutratma connects all points of view (Darshanas) was broken. The first six chapters of the Gita restore the synthesis, and in doing this they naturally point out the errors, by emphasizing the true points of view. These chapters are neither an attack on the false, nor a defence of the true, but a restoration of the lines of thought, at every deflection.

The position taken up by so-called Sannyasis and Yogis, 5,000 years ago, must have been something like that of our free-thinkers, who are only nominally free from the bondage of bias and fanaticism. In reality proud rationalists argue without any basis of reason and knowledge; their minds are fast bound by desires and fancy. They proceed by the negative route: we are not this, we are not that, we do not believe, we do not accept –not, not, not. The moment they begin to define what they are, and formulate their principles of ethics and of philosophy according to which they view life they become confounded. In the days when Shri Krishna taught, the Sannyasis and Yogis were taking this negative route: their proud boast was that they performed no rites and ceremonies, they kindled no fire, and so on. Yet a hundred deeds bound them fast to their pride, and much talk kindled the fire by friction, producing disunity and confusion all round. These nominal Yogis took the path of irresponsibility and indolence: they readily accepted what they should not do, but as readily rejected what they must do. They assumed virtues of omission but not of commission, and so the former became deadly sins.

On the other hand this verse has been exploited by the orthodox who make out that the Gita recommends performance of religious rites. It does not. And yet it does. It certainly does not support the view of religious orthodoxy. How can it? Synthesis of philosophies rises above and goes beyond any and every caste and race, creed and religion. Unless we look upon the Gita as Instruction for the human soul we are bound to be confused, now by one verse, now by another. Therefore if the Gita recommends performance of any ceremony it can only be such as is performed by the human Soul. This is the first lesson of the verse.

Secondly, it tells the aspirant to righteous living and soul-freedom what should be done. Not only does the Gita expose what is false, but also expounds what is true. It does not only say what a man ought not to do, but is positive and practical and says what ought to be practised. Actions must be done; fruits of action must not be allowed to interfere with that performance. What must not be done are deeds which are not duties; and duties must be done with an eye to present duties not to their future results. Thus a man is to be known not by what he does not do, but by what he actually does. Apply that to our present-day Sannyasis: do not judge by what they abjure in the name of their discipline, but by what they do and practise. This is the second lesson of the verse.

The aspirant to Righteous Life, called upon to do duties and to renounce fruits of actions, sorely needs some basic principle for this exercise. This the verse offers – indirectly and by implication. The nature of the actor, the doer of duties, has to be understood. Action is like energy–prana; its result is a form – rupa or body; but it is the actor who alone determines, like the Soul, actions and their results. Most men act unconsciously, that is, without any reference to or without any knowledge of the nature of the actor. If active doing brought peace and illumination our active civilization would be highly enlightened and calm. No – there are too many actions without a cognisance of the actor, with the result that the world is afire and and burning up with bad deeds and good deeds, but all thoughtless deeds. Fire is necessary, but not knowing the art of kindling it we are suffering from actions; the reaction will be towards non-action like those of the Sannyasis we mentioned.

This verse contains, most appropriately, the secret of kindling the fire; this instruction forms the heart of the verse; because it is hidden it is very often missed. This particular Instruction of the Gita is named Dhyana-Yoga; it is knowledge about meditation of a particular kind; in verse 46 it is shown that by this Dhyana the man attains to the superior position of a Dhyani. He is superior to the man of penances and austerities; superior also to the man of learning and even to the doer of noble deeds. He who becomes a member of this Order belongs to the Heart of the spiritual world. It is the most mysterious and secret Order whose father-head is Marichi, according to some texts. These Dhyanis are also known as Vairajas, whom fire cannot consume, because their bodies are composed of the highest essences of Fire. They are men’s real friends, guides and teachers, for They are the makers of Geniuses and Instructors. They kindle the latent Soul-Fire in the Race and feed it, from time to time, lest it go out. They feed that Soul-Fire in each of us by pointing out where the fuel of knowledge is and how it can be used.

The human Soul is born of Fire and is of the nature of fire (agni-jata); his body is the fire-censer (agni-dhana); his foremost duty is preserving and nourishing that fire (agni-rakshana). If we do not want to go wrong we must make that fire the eternal witness of all our deeds. In the marriage rite fire is the symbol of faith and love, which consume every impurity, and of creative wisdom. But that rite itself is the representative of the higher marriage between ourselves and the divinities of our Higher Selves, and it is that union which enables the Spirit-Soul to create Soul-children of radiant fiery-form (agni-rupa); this is what the true Gurus do, for Their chelas are Their children.

In the old rite of Agni-Shtoma the mystery of this Order of Dhyanis was revealed.* In our verse of the Gita the real Sannyasi and Yogi is one who knows how to preserve the Soul-fire in himself; also how to kindle it in others. He is a constant performer of ceremonies, without a thought of reward; these acts are tongues of fire and proceed from within the heart where that fire ever burns. These sacrificial acts or tongues of Soul-fire ascend towards Tapo-loka, the world of Those Dhyanis and they receive the grains of incense thrown for the blessing of our world by the Great Lords. Thus also it is not the chela, but the chela’s good sacrifices and noble acts of Soul, which attract the help and the blessing of the Guru. Actions bind the actor, not to actions but to the Great Actors when we perform deeds without caring for their fruits and rewards.

[* It is the ceremony of sacrifice performed at Spring time and it extends over several days; its symbology refers to the birth of self-consciousness caused by the higher pitris according to Hinduism, to the fall of angels according to Christianity, which process is fully discussed by H. P. Blavatsky in the second volume of The Secret Doctrine. – “The Aryan Path” Editors]

THE STRUCTURE OF THE MIND
(November 1934)
मांस्त्यक्त्वासर्वानशेषत:|

Abandoning every desire arising from imagination. – Bhagavad-Gita, VI. 24.

The sixth song of the Great Master contains the first of the lessons in Yoga – control of the senses, desires, thoughts. In verses 24-25 the beginner is told what to do, how to start on that long ascent which ultimately brings him to the summit from which the entire universe is seen. It will take him some time to catch the first view which will convince him beyond doubt that the climb is worth it; it will take him numerous lives before he comes to experience the dazzling splendour of the Universe of Light; and then, acclimatizing himself to it he will realize the radiance and the glory which is the source of that Light Itself. But a beginning has to be made and the earlier we start the better for us.

One of the main difficulties in the control of the senses and the mind is our fanciful imagination. The sights and the sounds from outside are easily shut out when the Soul takes hold of the mind and begins to use it for his own purposes. But sights and sounds also arise within ourselves and disturb the work of the Soul with the mind, and these are formidable. They are memory pictures which have deposited in the mind, during the course of work and play since the body was born, and as we go on we find out that they are even of previous lives. The mind is called the sixth sense and its threads and fibres are interwoven with and in the five senses. All the sense functions, trivial or important, colour the mind and affect its texture. Sense impressions are of the nature of images: every impression produces an image and changes the structure of the mind; every new image affects the old ones – some are wiped out, others fade out, and so on. Now these images result from the five senses and therefore possess the properties of each of them – they have colour, tone or note, smell, feel and taste. A similar but second class of images inhere in us as a result of the function of the organs of action. Between these two sets of images there is difference, but for our purposes it is sufficient to say that they affect the mind – refine or coarsen its texture, brighten or dull its stuff, make for melody or discord. Now, these images are also vehicles of karma. Just as we have the whole complex machinery we call the brain, which is a unit, but every thought, will, feeling and deed changes it by affecting particularly one part or another, so also all these images compose a unit which represents karma. In esoteric language karma is compared to a lotus – it grows out of mud and water; its stem and leaves belong to the earthly part of man; the bud with its capacity to drink the dew of night, to inhale the light of dawn, to absorb the morning sun, represents the celestial part of man.

Therefore these images are the old soil from which new karma, new images come forth. Our ripe or prarabdha karma is a natural product of our past; but our present outlook, our discrimination, our inclinations and choices acted out, give each man a chance to improve himself, the slowly blossoming lotus bud. But for the aspirant who has chosen to tread the path and climb the mountain a new factor arises: he is called upon to abjure from creating new images; neither to dwell with past memory-pictures, nor to create by fancy, imagination, anticipation, new images, thereby strengthening his inner world of mirage. This is real renunciation: it is not the actions which are to be renounced but the force which compels actions. Similarly, our verse does not say that sankalpa–imagination is to be renounced, but the desires (kama) arising from it must be abandoned. This is important: for, just as a man renouncing action falls into the path of passivity, so also the man who refuses to treat his imagination correctly, and will not use it, believing that thus his desires will vanish, takes a wrong course.

We possess the power of imagination (kalpana-tarka-shakti). It is the highest power of man, because it is a compound power in which desire, thought, resolve, and will, all function. These others create partially but imagination creates completely. The other forces create in one state (loka) or another, but imagination is kriya-shakti, creative power, in every loka. Only one or other aspect of imagination is functioning at present; the true Magician alone uses to the full his faculty to build living images. Human evolution may be described as the process by which the Soul who is man recreates himself in order, in symmetry, in harmony, in beauty. This can only be done by imagination–sankalpa, not Bhavani Shankarthat fanciful tendency of Shaikh-Chilli, but that faculty by which the Soul makes a matrix in matter and builds an image by filling up that matrix with the life-essence of his own being. This is utpatti, emanation.

Now if you go to our mythology you will find that sankalpa is called one of the Prajapatis, Creators of a whole race of beings. This power ignorantly used, or misused is but a shadow of real Sankalpa, which is personified as a Prajapati. Again it is said that Sankalpa is one of the daughters of Daksha. Now Daksha is ability, dexterity and creativeness personified, and is the title of the parent-creator, lord of creatures, the father of celestial and terrestrial progeny, one of whom is Sankalpa, Imagination – a daughter who is married to Dharma, Law, Order, Wisdom. When Dharma, knowledge and wisdom, woos and weds Sankalpa, Imagination, then are born Dhyanis, true contemplators, who are also called Sankalpa-Siddhas, perfect makers or builders of Living Images.

Just as our artists make pictures and statues, so these Dhyanis fill Akasha with pictures and portraits, idols and images, and we by ceasing to create our own pictures of kama – passionate sense, learn first to see and understand, and then to copy within ourselves, these images. Just as we see constellations in the night-sky, so do we see shining-pictures in the soul-sky, and gazing at them, contemplating them, we become like unto them. The Akasha is the real Temple of the Universe in which all Powers of Nature are Living Idols or Statues and if we worship our parents, Dharma–Wisdom and Sankalpa–Imagination, we will become an Idol in that Temple.