
 
Chapter IX 
It was night. I was sleepy and content, for I had been happy and amused, running hither and thither in the sweet-scented air. All the evening I had slept on my couch among the flowers that made my room fragrant, and I dreamed strange dreams in which each flower became a laughing face, and my ears were full of the sound of magic voices. I awoke suddenly and fancied I must be still dreaming, for the moonlight came into my room and fell upon the beautiful blossoms. And I thought with wonder of the simple home I had been reared in. How have I ever endured it? For now it I seemed to me that beauty was life.  
I was very happy.  
As I lay dreamily looking at the moonlight, the door in the corridor was suddenly opened from without. The corridor was full of light, such brilliant light that the moonlight seemed like darkness, and I was blinded. Then a number of neophytes entered my room, bringing with them some things that I could not see, because of the strong light. Then they went away and closed the door, leaving me alone in the moonlight, with two tall, white-robed, motionless forms. I knew who was with me though I dared not look -- it was Agmahd  and Kamen Baka .  
At first I trembled, but suddenly I saw the child glide forth from the shadow, her finger on her lips and a smile on her face.  
"Do not be afraid," she said. "They are going to put on you the beautiful robe you told them to prepare."  
I rose from my couch and looked at the priests. I was no longer afraid. Agmahd  stood motionless, his eyes fixed on me. The other approached me, holding in his hands a white robe. It was of fine linen and covered with rich gold embroidery, which I saw formed characters I could not understood. It was more beautiful than Agmahd 's robe and I had never seen anything so beautiful as that when I entered the temple.  
I was pleased, and held out my hand for the robe. Kamen   came close to me, and when I flung aside the one I wore, put this upon me with his own hands.  
It was steeped with a subtle perfume, which I inhaled with delight. This seemed to me a royal robe!  
Kamen   advanced to the door and opened it. The brilliant light streamed in full upon me. Agmahd  remained standing motionless, his eyes fixed on me.  

 
The child looked upon me with admiration and clapped her hands in delight. Then she held out one hand and took mine. "Come," she said. I yielded, and together we went into the corridor, Agmahd  close behind us. The scene we entered startled 
me, and I paused. The great corridor was full of priests, save just where I stood, close to the door of the holy of holies. Here a large space was left, and in this space stood a couch covered with silken drapery, embroidered with gold, in characters resembling those upon my dress. About the couch was a bank or hedge of sweet smelling flowers, and all around the ground was strewn with plucked blossoms. I shrank from the great crowd of motionless white-robed priests, whose eyes were fixed on me, but the beautiful colors pleased me.  
"This couch is for us," said the child, and led me to it. No one else spoke or moved, and I obeyed her. We advanced, and upon the couch found our golden ball with which we had played in the garden. I looked in a sudden wonder to see if Agmahd  watched us. He stood by the door of the holy of holies; his eyes were on me. Kamen   stood nearer to us, and he was gazing at the closed door of the sanctuary, and his lips were moving as if he were repeating words. No one seemed angry with us, so I looked back at the child. She snatched up the ball and sprang to one end of the great couch; I could not resist her gaiety; I sprang to the other end of the couch, and laughed too. She flung me the ball; I caught it in my hands, but before I could throw it back to her, the corridor was plunged into complete profound darkness. For a moment my breath died away in the sudden agony of fear, but suddenly I found that I could see the child, and that she was laughing. I flung her the ball, and she caught it, and laughed again. I looked around, and saw that all else was black darkness. I thought of the awful figure I had seen before in the darkness, and I must have cried aloud with fear but for the child. She came to me and put her hand in mine.  
"Are you afraid?" she said; "I am not. And you need not fear. They would not harm you, for they worship you!"  
While she spoke, I heard music -- gay, wonderful music -- that made my heart beat fast and my feet long to dance.  
A moment later and I saw the light come round the sanctuary door, and the door open. Was that awful figure coming forth? My limbs shook at the thought, but yet I did not lose all courage as before. The child's presence and the gay music kept from me the horror of solitude. The child rose, holding my hand in hers. We approached the sanctuary door. I was unwilling, yet I could not resist the guidance which led me on. We entered the door, and as we did so the music ceased. All was still again. But there was a faint light within the sanctuary which seemed to come from the far end of the chamber. The child led me towards this light. She was with me, and I was not afraid. At the end of the chamber was a small inner room, or recess, cut, as I could see, in the rock. I could see this, for there was enough light here. A woman sat on a low seat, her head bent over a great book, which she held open on her knee. My eyes were riveted to her instantly, and I could not remove them. I knew her, and the heart within me shuddered at the thought that she would raise her head, and I should see her face.  
Suddenly I knew my companion the child, was gone. I did not look to see, for my eyes were held by a supreme fascination, but I felt my hand had no answering clasp. I knew her presence was gone.  

 
I waited, standing still as one of those figures carved in the avenue of the temple.  
At last she lifted her head and looked at me. My blood shivered and grew cold. It seemed to myself that I froze, for those eyes cut like steel, yet I could not resist or turn away, or even hide my eyes from that awful sight.  
"You have come to me to learn. Well, I will teach you," she said, and her voice sounded low and sweet like the soft tones of a musical instrument. "You love beautiful things and flowers. You will be a great artist if you live for beauty alone, but you must be more than that." She held out her hand to me, and, against my will, I lifted mine, and gave it her but she barely touched it; at the touch my hand was suddenly full of roses, and all the place was filled with their scent. She laughed, and the sound was musical; I suppose my face pleased her.  
"Come now," she said, "and stand nearer me, for you no longer fear me." With my eyes upon the roses, I approached her; they held my sight, and I did not fear her when I did not see her face.  
She put her arm round me and drew me close to her side. Suddenly I saw that the dark robe she wore was no garment of linen or cloth -- it was alive -- it was a drapery of coiling snake, who clung about her and made folds that had seemed to me like soft hanging draperies when I stood a little away from her. 
Now terror overcame me; I tried to scream but could not, I tried to fly from her but could not. She laughed again but this time her laugh was harsh. But while I looked all was changed, and her robe was dark -- dark still but not alive. I stood breathless, wondering in cold with fear -- her arm was still about me! She raised her other hand and placed it on my forehead. Then fear left me altogether; I seemed happy and quiet. My eyes were shut, although I saw; I was conscious, yet I did not desire to move. She rose, and lifting me in her arms, placed me on the low stone seat where she had herself been sitting. My head fell back against the wall of rock behind me. I was dumb and still, but I could see.  
She rose up to her full height and stretched her arms aloft above her head, and again I saw the serpents. They were vigorous and full of life. They were not only her dress but they were about her head. I could not tell if they were her hair or if they were in it. She clasped her hands high above her head, and the terrible creatures hung wreathing from her arms. But I was not afraid. Fear seemed to have left me forever.  
Suddenly I became aware that there was another presence in the sanctuary. Agmahd  was there, standing at the door of the inner cavern. 
I looked in wonder at his face, it was so still; the eyes were unseeing. Then I knew suddenly that they were in very fact unseeing; that this figure, this light, I myself, were all invisible to him.  
She turned to me, or leaned towards me, so that I saw her face, and her eyes were on mine; otherwise she did not move. Those eyes that cut like steel no longer filled me with terror, but they held me with a grasp as of some iron instrument. While I watched her, suddenly I saw the serpents change and vanish; they became long sinuous folds of some soft gray gleaming garment, and their hands and terrible eyes changed into starry groups of roses. And a rich strong scent of roses filled the sanctuary. Then I saw Agmahd  smile.  
"My Queen is here," he said.  
"Your Queen is here," I said, and did not know I had spoken till I heard my own voice. "She waits to know your desire."  
"Tell me," he said, " what is her robe?" I answered, "It shines and gleams, and on her shoulders are roses."  
"I do not desire pleasure," he said; "my soul is sick of it. But I demand power."  
Until now her eyes fixed on mine had told me what to speak; but now I heard her voice again.  "In the temple?"  
And I repeated her words, unconscious that I did so till I caught the echo of my voice.  
"No," answered Agmahd  contemptuously. "I must go outside these walls, and mix with men and work my will among them. I demand the power to do this. It was promised to me; that promise has not been fulfilled."  
"Because you lacked the courage and the strength to compel its fulfillment."  
"I lack those no longer," answered Agmahd , and for the first time I saw his face flame with passion.  
"Then utter the fatal words," she said.  
Agmahd 's face changed. He stood still for some moments, and his face grew colder and more stony than any carven form.  
"I renounce my humanity," he said at last, uttering the words slowly, so that they appeared to pause and rest upon the air.  

"It is well," she said. "But you cannot stand alone. You must bring me others ready like yourself to brave all and know all. I must have twelve sworn servants. Get me these, and you shall have your desire."  
"Are they to be my equals?" demanded Agmahd .  
"In desire and in courage, yes; in power, no; because each will have a different desire; thus will their service be acceptable to me."  
Agmahd  paused a moment. Then he said, "I obey my Queen. But I must be aided in so difficult a task. How shall I tempt them?"  
At these words she flung out her arms, opening and shutting her hands with a strange gesture, which I could not understand. Her eyes gleamed like hot coals, and then grew cold and dull.  
"I will direct you," she answered. "Be faithful to my orders and you need not fear. Only obey me and you shall succeed. You have every element within this temple. There are ten priests ready to our hand. They are full of hunger. I will satisfy them. You I will satisfy when your courage and steadfastness is proved -- not until then for you demand much more than these others."  
"And who shall be the one to complete the number?" asked Agmahd .  
She turned her eyes again upon me.  
"This child," she answered. "He is mine -- my chosen and favorite servant. I will teach him: and through him I will teach you."  

 
Chapter X 
"Tell Kamen Baka  , that I know his heart's desire, and that he shall have it, but that he must first pronounce the fatal words."  
Agmahd  bowed his head and turned away. He silently left the sanctuary.  
I was again alone with her. She approached me and fastened her terrible eyes on mine.  
While I gazed at her she vanished from before me, and in her place was a golden light which gradually shaped itself into a form more beautiful than any I had ever seen.  
It was a tree full of foliage that hung soft like hair rather than leaves, and on each branch was a multitude of flowers growing in thick clusters, and among the flowers were a number of birds all golden and gay with brilliant colors, and they darted hither and thither among the glowing blossoms, till my eyes grew dazzled, and I cried aloud, "Oh give me one of these little birds for my own that it may come to me and nestle as it does in those flowers."  
"You shall have a hundred of them, and they will so love you they will kiss your mouth and take food from your lips. By-and-by you shall have a garden in which a tree like this shall grow, and all the birds of the air will love you. But first you must do my bidding. Speak to Kamen   and bid him enter the sanctuary."  
"Enter," I said, "the priest Kamen Baka   shall enter."  
He came and stood within the doorway of the inner cavern. The tree had vanished, and I saw before me the dark figure with its shining flowing robes and cruel eyes; they were fixed on the priest.  
"Tell him," she said slowly, "that his heart's hunger shall be satisfied. He desires love -- he shall have it. The priests of the temple have turned cold faces towards him, and he feels that their hearts are as stone. He wants to see them on their knees around him, adoring him, willing slaves. He shall have it; for he shall take upon him this once, which until now has been mine. He shall gratify their heart's lust, and in return they will put him alone upon a pedestal above all but myself. Is the bribe great enough?"  
She said these words in a tone of intense contempt, and I could read in her terrible face that she despised him for the narrow limit of his ambition. But the sting left the words as I repeated them.  

 
Kamen   bowed his head, and a strange glow of exultation came upon his face.  
"It is," he said.  
"Then pronounce the fatal words!"  
Kamen Baka   fell upon his knees and Rung his hands high above his head. The look in his face changed to one of agony.  
"From henceforward, though all men love me, I love no man!"  
The dark figure swept towards him and touched his head with her hand. "You are mine," she said, and turned away, a smile that was dark and cold like a northern frost upon her face. She gave me the idea of a teacher and a guide with Kamen  ; to Agmahd  she had rather spoken as a queen might to her chief favorite, one whom she values and fears at once; one who has strength.  
"Now, child, there is work to do," she said, approaching me. "This book has written in it the hearts of the priests who shall be my servants. Thou art weary and must rest, for I will not that they injure thee. Thou must grow to a strong man worthy of my favor. But carry the book with thee in thy arms; and as soon as thou shalt wake in the early morn Kamen   
 shall come to thee, and thou shalt read to him the first  of this volume. When he has succeeded in accomplishing the first task, then he shall again come to thee at early morn and thou shalt read to him the second; and in this way the book will be finished. Tell him this; and bid him not despair at any time, because of difficulties. With each difficulty surmounted his power will increase, and when all is done he will stand supreme."  
I repeated these words to Kamen  . He was standing now at the doorway, his hands clasped in front of him, and his head drooped low, so that I could not see his face. But as I ceased, he raised his head and said, "I obey."  
His face wore still the strange gleam which I had seen on it before.  
"Bid him go," she said, "and he is to send Agmahd  hither."  
When I repeated this, he quietly withdrew; and I could see by his movements that the place to his eyes was all darkness.  
A moment later and Agmahd  stood in the doorway. She approached him and laid her hand upon his forehead. Immediately I saw a crown there; and Agmahd  smiled.  
"It shall be yours," she said. "Say this to Agmahd ; it is the greatest crown but one upon the earth; and that greater one he would not wear. Now bid him carry thee in his arms and lay thee on thy couch. But thou clasp tight the book."  
While I was repeating her words, she came to me and touched my forehead. A deep delicious languor came upon me, and I thought the words faded on my lips. But I could not say them again; all had vanished. I was asleep.  

 
Chapter XI 
When I awoke it was broad daylight; and I felt that I had slept a long deep sleep. My room was like a garden it was so full of flowers. My eyes wandered around them in pleasure, but presently lighted on an object which kept them fixed. It was a kneeling figure in the midst of the room; a priest whose head was bowed low; but I knew it was Kamen Baka . I moved, and at the slight sound I made he raised his head and looked towards me. In moving, I found that the book lay beside me open. My eyes became fastened to the . I saw words that shone, and unconsciously I read them aloud. I ceased at last, because no more was writ in plain language, but all was hieroglyphics.  
Kamen Baka  started to his feet. I looked at him, and saw his face was all alight with what seemed like wild exultation.  
"He shall kiss my feet to day," he cried out. Then observing my wondering gaze, he said, "Have you read all?"  
"All that I can understand," I answered. "The rest is in strange characters that I do not know."  
He turned instantly and left my chamber. I looked back at the  of the book which I had read to see what were the words which had so strangely excited him. They were now no longer intelligible to me -- they too were writ in hieroglyphics -- and I gazed at them in despair, for now I found I could remember no word of what I had read. I grew weary with puzzling over this strange thing, and at last I fell asleep again my head upon the open s of the mystic book. I did not rouse from the deep dreamless sleep in which I was, until a sound startled me. Two young priests were in my room; they carried cakes and milk, and fell upon their knees to offer me the food. I was afraid, or I should have laughed to see them thus kneeling to me, a boy of the country. When I had eaten they left me, but I was not long alone. The curtain lifted, and at the sight of one who entered, I sprang to my feet and laughed with pleasure. It was Seboua  , the gardener.  
"How is it you have come to me?" I asked. "I thought indeed I was never to see you again."  "Agmahd  sent me here," he said.  
"Agmahd !" I cried in amazement. I approached him and pressed his arm between my hands.  
"Oh yes, I am real," he answered. "They cannot make a phantom of me. Do not doubt when you see me it is I myself."  

 
He spoke angrily and roughly, and for a moment I was afraid, but not for long. The strange smile came on his ugly face.  
"You are to come with me into the garden" he said, and held out his dark large hand. I put mine in it, and together we left my room and went quickly away through the large empty chambers and long passages of the temple till we reached that narrow iron gateway through which I had first seen Seboua's face. As then so now, the garden shone beyond, a vision of greenness and light and color.  
"Oh! I am glad to come back here," I said.  
"You came first to work; you were to be the drudge for me," said Seboua  , proudly. "Now all's changed. You are to play, not work, and I am to treat you like a little prince. Well! have they spoiled thee yet, I wonder, child? Would'st like to bathe?"  
"But where," I said, "in what waters? I would love to plunge in and swim in some water that was cool and deep."  
"Thou canst swim? and thou lovest the water? Well, come with me and I will show thee deep water that will be cool indeed. Come thou with me!"  
He walked on and I had to hurry to keep pace with him. He muttered to himself as he went, but I could not understand his words. Indeed, I did not listen for I was thinking of how glorious the plunge into cool water would be on this warm languid morning.  
We came to a place where there was a wide, deep pool, into which water came dropping, dropping, in a quick swift shower from some place above.  
"There is water for thee," said Seboua  , "and no flowers are there for thee to hurt."  
I stood on the brink in the warm sunlight and flung my white robe from me. Then with one instant of pause to look around and think how sweet the sun was, I plunged into the water. Ah! indeed, it was cold! My breath was almost gone with the sudden chill, but I struck out and began to swim, and soon began to glory in the sense of keen refreshment. I felt strong and eager, here in the sweet fresh waters. No longer languid as amid the fragrant odors of the temple, or the rich scents of the flowers in my chamber. I was so happy, I wanted to stay a long while here in the water mid the sun; so presently I ceased swimming and let myself float idly, and, closed my eyes that the sunlight should not blind me.  
Suddenly I felt something so strange, I grew breathless, yet it was so gentle it did not terrify me. It was a kiss upon my mouth. I opened my eyes. There, beside me, lying upon the surface of the water, was my own Queen, the Lily Queen, the Lady of the Lotus (Vidya, spiritual intelligence) of the Lotus. I uttered a cry of joy. Immediately all pleasure which I had had since last I saw her vanished from my mind. She was my Queen, my beautiful friend; when she was there I had none other in all the world.  
"Child, thou art come to me again" she said, "but soon thou wilt leave me; and how can I aid thee if thou forgettest me utterly?"  
I made no answer, for I was ashamed. I could hardly believe that I had indeed forgotten and yet I knew that it was true.  
"The waters thou liest in now," she said, "come from that place where my flowers, the lotus blossoms, dwell in their glory. Thou wouldst die wert thou to lie thus in the water where they dwell. But this that drops from them has but little of their life in it, and has given up its own to them. When thou must plunge into the water of the lotus tank, then thou wilt be strong as the eagle and eager as the young life of the newborn. My child, be thou strong; listen not to the flattery which confuses thee; listen only to the truth I keep in the sunlight, dear child, and let not the phantoms delude thee; for there is the life of lives awaiting thee, the pure flower of knowledge and love is ready for thee to pluck. Wouldst thou be a tool, a mere instrument in the hands of those who desire only for themselves? No! acquire knowledge and grow strong; then shalt thou be a giver of sunshine to the world. Come, my child, give me thine hand; rise in confidence, for this water will support thee; rise and kneel upon it and drink of the sunshine; rise and kneel upon it, and address thyself to the light of all life, that it may illumine thee."  
I rose, holding her hand. I knelt beside her. I rose again and with her stood upon the water -- and then I knew no more.  
"Wouldst thou be a tool, a mere instrument in the hands of those who desire only for themselves? No! acquire knowledge and grow strong; then shalt thou be a giver of sunshine to the world."  
These words seemed whispered in my ear as I awoke; I repeated them over and over, and remembered every separate word rightly. But they were vague and unmeaning to me; I had fancied I understood them when first I heard them, but now they sounded to me as the good words of the preacher sound to the dancers at the festivals.  
* * * * * * *  
I was a child when these words were breathed into my ear -- a lad, helpless because ignorant and full of youth. Through the years of my growth, the cry to my soul from the Lily Queen rang dimly and without meaning in the obscure regions of my brain. They were to me as the song of the priest to the babe that hears but its music. Yet I never forgot them. My life was given up to the men who held me in bondage, in spirit and in body; fetters lay heavy on my unawakened soul. While my body yielded dully to the guidance of its masters, I was a slave, yet knew that freedom existed beneath the free sky! But, though I obeyed blindly, and gave all my strength and powers to the base uses of the desecrated temple, in my heart I held fast the memory of the beautiful queen and in my mind her words were written in fire that would not die. Yet as I grew to man's stature, my soul sickened within me. These words which lived like a star in my soul cast a strange light upon my wretched life. And as my mind developed I recognized this, and a heavy weariness, as of death or despair, shut away from me all the beauty of the world. From a gay child, a happy creature of sunshine, I grew into a sad youth, whose eyes were large and heavy with tears, and whose sick heart held hidden within it many secrets, but half understood, of shame and sin and sorrow. Sometimes, when I wandered through the garden I gazed into the still water of the lily tank and prayed to see again the vision. But it came not I had lost the innocence of childhood, and had not yet won the strength of the man.  

