I turned with a sudden alarm.  
Yes! I was alone. He was gone -- the dread priest Agmahd   -- he had gone without another word, and let me in this room.  
What could it mean? I crossed to the door and tried it. It was fast closed and barred.  
I was a prisoner. But what could it mean? I looked around the massive stone walls -- I glanced up at the high window -- I thought of the near neighborhood of the sanctuary -- and I flung myself upon the couch and hid my face.  
I imagine that I must have lain there for hours. I did not dare to arise and make any disturbance. I had nothing to appeal to but the blue, pitiless eyes of the priest Agmahd . I lay upon my couch with fast-closed eyes, not daring to face the aspect of my prison and praying that the night might never come.  
It was yet the early part of the day, that I felt sure of, although I knew not how long a time I had passed in the garden with Seboua  . The sun was high, and streamed in at my window. I saw this as, after a long time had passed, I turned and looked around, my room with a sudden and alarmed glance. I had the idea that some one was in it -- but, unless hidden behind the curtains, no visible form was in the room.  
No, I was alone. And as I gathered courage to look up to the sunlight that made my window a thing glorious for the eyes, I began to realize that it still veritably was in existence; and that, notwithstanding my recent hideous experiences, I was nothing but a boy who loved sunshine.  
The attraction grew very strong, and at last fanned itself into the wish to climb up to the high window and look. The passion which caused me to desire so ardently to do this, having once thought of it, I can no more account for than I could for most of the inquisitive and headstrong purposes of a boy's brain. At all events I rose from my couch -- casting all terror of my surroundings to the winds, now that I had a purpose sufficiently childish to absorb me. The wall was perfectly smooth; but I fancied that, by standing on a table that was beneath the window, I could reach the sill with my hands, and so raise myself up to see out. I soon climbed the table, but I could barely reach the sill with upstretched arms. I jumped a little, and just catching hold of the sill managed to draw myself upwards. I suppose that part of the enterprise must have been the delight to me; for I certainly did not anticipate seeing anything but the temple gardens.  
What I saw, though there was nothing perhaps very startling, sobered my enjoyment.  The gardens were not there. My window looked out upon a small square piece of ground, which was surrounded by high blank walls. I soon saw that these were evidently walls of the temple, not outer walls. The piece of ground was enclosed in the very heart of the great building, for I could see its columns and roofs rising beyond each side, and the walls were blank. Mine was the only window I could perceive any trace of.  
At that moment I heard a faint sound in the room, and, quickly letting myself drop, I stood upon the table, looking round in consternation. The sound seemed to proceed, from behind a heavy curtain that half covered one wall. I stood breathless, and, even in this broad daylight and gleaming sunshine, somewhat in terror of what I might see. For I had no idea that there was any mode of entrance but that door by which I had come, so that I scarce dared to hope for a wholesome human presence!  
These fears soon vanished, however, for the curtain was drawn a little back, and a black-robed novice -- whom I had not seen before -- crept from out its shelter. I wondered at his stealthy manner; but I had no fears, for he held in his hand a glorious blossom of the royal white lotus flower. I sprang from the table and advanced towards him, my eyes upon the flower. When quite close he spoke, very low and quickly.  
"This," he said, "is from Seboua  . Cherish it, but let none of the priests see it. Cherish it, and it will help you in hours when you will need help; and Seboua  urges that you remember all the words he has said to you, and that you trust, above all, to your love for the truly beautiful and to your natural likes and dislikes. That is the message," he said, stepping back towards the curtain. "I am risking my life here to please Seboua  . Be careful that you never come near this door, or show that you know it exists; it opens into the private room of the high priest Agmahd , into which none dare enter save on peril of intolerable punishment."  
"And how have you come through?" I asked in great curiosity.  
"They are engaged in the morning ceremonies -- all the priests -- and I succeeded in escaping unseen to come to you."  
"Tell me," I cried, holding him even as he endeavored to hurry through the door, "why did not Seboua  come?"  
"He cannot -- he is closely watched that he may make no effort to get near you."  "But why is this?" I exclaimed in dismay and wonder.  
"I cannot tell," said the novice, extracting his garment from my grasp. "Remember the words I have said." He hastily passed through the door and closed it behind him. I found myself half smothered by the heavy curtain and, as soon as I could recover from my amazement at this sudden appearance and disappearance, I moved it aside and stepped out, the lily in my hand.  
My first thought, even before I would let myself think over the words which I was to remember -- was to place my precious flower in some safe place. I held it tenderly, as though it were the breathing form of one I loved. I looked around anxiously, wondering where it would be both unseen and yet preserved.  
I saw, after a few moments spent in hasty inspection that just behind the head of my couch there was a corner which the curtain fell a little away from. Here, at least, I might place it for a while; it would have room to breathe, and would not be seen unless the curtain were moved away -- and behind my couch seemed a less likely place for it to be discovered in than any other. I hastily placed it here, afraid to keep it in my hand lest the ceremonies should be over and Agmahd  enter my room. So I hid it, and then looked around for some vessel of water in which I might place it, for it occurred to me that, if I did not supply it with some of that element which it so dearly loved, it would not live long to be my friend.  
I found a little earthen jar of water and placed it in it, wondering the while what I should do if the priests, discovering its absence, should ask me for it. I could not tell what to do in such an emergency; but, if the flower were discovered, I could only hope that some inspiration would be given me by which I might avoid throwing further blame upon Seboua  ; for, though I could not understand why or how, it was very evident that he had been blamed for something in connection with me.  
I went and sat on the couch, to be near my beloved flower. How I desired that I might place it in the sunshine and revel in its beauties!  
In this way the day passed. No one came near me. I watched the sun pass away from my window. I watched the shadows of evening descend upon it. I was still alone. I do not think I grew more terrified. I do not remember that the coming night brought with it any agony of fear. I was filled with a deep calmness, which either the long undisturbed hours of the day had produced, or else it was wrought by the beautiful though unseen flower; for that was ever before my eyes in all its radiant and delicate beauty. I had none of the intolerable visions which I had been unable to drive from me in the former night.  
It was quite dark when the door which communicated with the corridor opened, and Agmahd  entered, followed by a young priest, who brought me food and a cup of some strange sweet-smelling syrup. I should not have stirred from my couch had it not been that I longed for food. I had not thought of it before, but I was indeed faint and fasting. I rose eagerly, therefore, and, when the young priest brought the food to my side, I drank first of the syrup -- which indeed he offered me first -- for my exhaustion suddenly became plain to me.  
Agmahd  looked on me as I drank. When I had put down the cup, I raised my eyes to his with a new defiance.  
"I shall go mad," I said boldly, "if you leave me in this room alone. I have never been left alone so long in all my life."  

I spoke under a sudden impulse. When I had been passing the long hours in solitude they had not seemed so terrible; but now, with a quick apprehension of the evil of this solitariness, I spoke out my feeling.  
Agmahd  said to the young priest --  
"Set the food down and fetch hither the book that lies upon the couch in my outer room."  
He departed on his errand, Agmahd  said nothing to me; and I -- having said my say, and not having, as I rather expected, been annihilated for it -- took up an oiled cake from the platter, and cheerfully went on with my meal.  
Five years after I could not have faced Agmahd  in this way. I could not have eaten my all having just defied him. But now I was elated by the supreme ignorance and indifference of youth. I had no measuring line for the depths of the priest's intellect -- the wide embracingness of his stern cruelty. How should I have? I was ignorant. And, moreover, I had no clue to the mode of his cruelty -- the purpose, the intention of it. I was in the dark altogether. But I was well aware that my life in the temple was not what I had looked for if it was to be like this, and I already cherished boyish notions of escaping from it (even down the terrible corridor) if I were to exist after such an unhappy fashion. I little knew when I thought of this how well I was guarded.  
Agmahd  said no word while I ate and drank, and presently the young priest opened the door and entered, bearing in his hands a large black book. He placed it on a table which Agmahd  told him to draw near to my couch. A lamp was then brought by him from a corner of the room and placed on the table. He lighted it, and this done, Agmahd  spoke:  
"You need not be lonely if you look within those s."  
So saying, he turned and left the room, followed by the young priest.  
I opened it at once. It seems, looking back on that time, that I was to the full as inquisitive as most boys; at all events, any new object riveted my attention for the time being. I opened the black covers of the volume and gazed on the first . It was beautifully colored, and I looked in pleasure at the colors a little while before I began to spell out the letters. They stood out from a gray background in letters of so brilliant a hue that they seemed like fire. The title was -- "The Arts and Powers of Magic."  
It was nonsense to me. I was a comparatively uneducated boy, and I wondered what companionship Agmahd  supposed such a book could afford me.  
I turned idly over its s. They were all unintelligible to me, by very reason even of the words used, apart from the matter. The thing was ridiculous, to have sent me this book to read. I yawned widely over it, and closing the book was about to lie down again upon my couch, when I was startled to observe that I was not alone. On the other side of the little table whereon my book and lamp were, stood a man in a black dress. He was looking earnestly upon me, but when I returned his gaze he seemed to retreat from me a little. I wondered how he could have entered so noiselessly and approached so near me without sound. 
 
 
Chapter VI 
"Have you any wish?" said the man in a clear, but very low voice.  
I looked at him in surprise. He was a novice, it seemed, by his dress; yet he spoke as though he could gratify my wish -- and that, too, without the tone of a mere servant.  
"I have just taken food," I answered. "I have no wish -- but for freedom from this room."  "That," he answered quietly, "is soon gratified. Follow me."  
I stared in astonishment. This novice must know my position -- must know of Agmahd 's will with regard to me. Dare be thus defy him?  
"No," I answered; "the high priests have imprisoned me here; if I am found escaping I shall be punished!" 
"Come!" was all his answer. And as he spoke he raised one hand commandingly. As in physical pain I cried aloud; why, I could not realize. Yet my sense seemed to be that I was held as by a vice -- that some intolerable power grasped my frame and shook it. A second after I stood beside my mysterious visitor, my hand tight clasped in his. "Look not back!" he cried. "Come with me."  
And I followed him. Yet, at the door I desired to turn my head to look; and by what seemed a great effort, I did so.  
Little marvel that he bade me not look back! Little marvel that he strove to hurry me from the room, for when my eyes had once turned I remained spellbound, gazing -- resisting his iron grasp.  
I saw myself -- or rather my unconscious form -- and then for the first time, I understood that my companion was no denizen of earth -- that I had again entered the land of shadows.  
But this wonder was wholly swallowed up in a larger one -- one sufficient to make me strong against the effort of my companion to draw me from the room.  
Leaning over the couch -- standing behind it and bending forward, in that delicious drooping attitude in which I had first seen her when she stooped to drink the water -- I saw the Lily Queen.  
And I heard her speak. Her voice came to me like the dropping of water -- like the spray of a fountain.  
 
"Wake, sleeper -- dream no more, nor remain within this accursed spell."  
"Lady (Vidya, spiritual intelligence) , I obey," I murmured, within myself, and instantly a mist seemed to enwrap me. I was but dimly conscious -- yet I knew that, in obedience to the wish of the beautiful queen I was endeavoring to return to my natural state. I succeeded by degrees, and opened my eyes wearily and heavily, to behold a desolate empty room. The novice had left me -- of that I was glad -- but, alas! the Lady of the Lotus (Vidya, spiritual intelligence) of the Lotus had left me also. The room seemed empty indeed, and my heart was heavy as I looked around me. I felt the sweet Lady of the Flower more as a beautiful mother in my childish heart, than as a queen. I yearned for her soft presence. But it was not there. I knew only too well that she was not in the room hidden from me. I felt her absence with my soul as well as perceived it with my eyes.  
I raised myself languidly enough, for, indeed, this last struggle had out-wearied me, and went to the corner behind my couch where my dear flower was hid. I drew back the curtain a little way, to look at my treasure. Alas! it was already drooping its lovely head! I sprang forward to assure myself that I had indeed given it water. Yes, its stem was deeply plunged in its lower element. Yet the flower drooped like a dead thing, and the stem bent inertly over the edge of the vessel.  
"My flower," I cried, kneeling down beside it, "art thou too gone? -- am I quite alone?"  
I took the languid flower-form from the vessel and placed it upon my breast, within my robe. And then wholly disconsolate for the moment, I flung myself again upon my couch and closed my eyes, endeavoring to make them dark and visionless.  
How? -- who knows the way to hide visions from the inner eye, that eye which has the terrible gift of sight which no darkness can blind? I did not, then at all events.  
The night had descended on the earth, when I aroused myself from my long and silent rest. It was moonlight without, and a silvery streak of light entered at the high window and streamed into my room. Within that streak of light came the hem of a white garment; a hem gold-embroidered. I knew the embroidery -- I raised my eyes slowly, for I expected to recognize Agmahd , as indeed I did. He stood just within the dim shadow; but his bearing was not easily confused with that of another man even if his face were unseen.  
I lay perfectly still; yet he seemed immediately to know that I was awake.  
"Rise," he said. I rose, and stood beside my couch, with wide eyes of fear fixed upon him.  
"Drink that which is beside you," he said. I looked and saw a cup full of red liquid. I drank it, blindly hoping it might give me strength to bear whatever ordeal the silent hours of this night might be destined to bring upon me. "Come," he said; and I followed him to the door. I half unconsciously cast a glance up to the window, in the thought that perchance fresh air and freedom lay before me. Suddenly I felt myself blinded -- quickly I put my hand to my eyes; a soft substance was bound over them. I was silent with the silence of wonder and of fear; I felt myself supported and led onward carefully. I shuddered as I thought 
that it must be the arm of Agmahd  which upheld me, but I submitted to the contact, knowing that I was powerless to resist it.  
We moved onwards slowly; I was conscious of leaving my own room and of traversing some distance beyond it, but how far or in what direction I was unable to guess, bewildered as I was by my blindfold state.  
We paused in utter silence; the arm around me was removed, and I felt the bandage taken from my eyes. They opened upon a darkness so complete that I raised my hand to assure myself that the kerchief was not still upon them. No -- they were free -- they were open -- yet they gazed upon nothing but a blank wall of deep and total darkness. My head was full of pain and dizziness -- the fumes of the strong syrup that I had drunk seemed to have filled it with confusion. I remained motionless, hoping to recover myself and realize my position.  
While I waited, I suddenly became conscious of a new presence close beside me. I did not shrink from it. I seemed to know it to be beautiful, to be friendly and glorious. I was thrilled with a yearning, an indescribable sense of leaning in spirit towards the unknown presence.  
Amid the silence suddenly came low, sweet speech close to mine ear.  
"Tell Agmahd  that he disobeys the law. One priest alone may enter the holy of holies, and no more."  
I recognized the liquid water-like voice of the Lily Queen. Although I was unaware of the priest's presence I unhesitatingly obeyed my queen.  
"One priest alone may enter the holy of holies," I said, "and no more. Agmahd  being here the law is disobeyed."  
"I demand to hear the utterance of the queen" came the reply in the solemn tones of Agmahd .  
"Tell him," said that other voice which thrilled my soul and made my frame vibrate, "that had I been able to reveal myself in his presence I had not waited for you."  
I repeated her words. There was no answer, but I heard a movement -- footsteps -- and a door closed softly. Immediately a soft hand touched me. I was simultaneously conscious of the touch, and of a faint light upon my chest. I felt in a second that the hand was put within my dress to draw forth the withered lily which I had hid there. But I did not attempt to hinder this, for, looking up as a light attracted my eyes, I beheld standing before me the Lily Queen. My queen as in my boyish heart I had begun to call her, I saw dimly and as enveloped in a shadowy mist, but yet plainly enough to make me rejoice in her near presence. And as I looked I saw that she held close to her bosom the withered flower which she had taken from mine. And I saw, wonderingly, that it faded yet more, grew dimmer, and wholly vanished. Yet I did not regret it, for, as it died away, she grew more bright and distinct to my sight. When the flower had wholly disappeared she stood beside me, clear and distinct, illuminated by her own radiance.  
"Fear no longer," she said, "they cannot harm thee, for thou hast entered within my atmosphere. And though they have placed thee in the very dungeon of vice and falsehood, have no fear, but observe all things, and remember what thine eyes perceive."  
The darkness appeared to become illumined by her confident and gracious words. I grew bold, and full of strength.  
She held out her hand and touched me gently. The touch filled me with a fire that excelled any warmth I had ever experienced.  
"The royal flower of Egypt dwells upon the sacred waters, which in their purity and peace fitly form its eternal resting-place. I am the spirit of the flower; I am sustained upon the waters of truth, and my life is formed of the breath of the heavens, which is love. But the degradation of my earthly resting-place, over which my wings of love yet brood, is driving from it the light of heaven which is wisdom. Not long can the spirit of the royal lotus live in darkness; the flower droops and dies if the sun be withdrawn from it. Remember these words, child, grave them upon your heart, for as your mind becomes capable of grasping them, they will enlighten you in many things."  
"Tell me," I said, "when may I again visit the lilies? Will you not take me there in to-morrow's sunshine? Now it is night, and I am tired; may I not sleep at your feet, and to-morrow be with you in the garden?"  
"Poor child," she said, stooping towards me so that her breath fanned me, and it was sweet like the scent of wild flowers, "how hardly have they taxed thee! Rest here in my arms, for thou art to be my seer, and the enlightener of my loved land. Strength and health must dwell upon thy brow like jewels. I will guard thee; sleep, child."  
I lay down at her bidding, and though I knew that I was upon a cold, hard floor, I felt that my head rested upon an arm soft and full of magnetic soothing; and I fell into deep, dreamless, undisturbed slumber.  
There was writ in Agmahd 's secret volume of records but one word that night, -- "Vain."  

 
Chapter VII 
A white flower was in my hand when I awoke. Its beauty filled my heart with gladness, I looked on it and was refreshed and content, as though I had slept in my mother's arms, and this was her kiss on my lips, for I held the flower, a half-blown lotus-blossom, close to my mouth. I did not wonder at first how I had obtained it, I only looked upon its beauty and was happy, for it made me know that my queen, my one friend, did indeed guard me.  
Suddenly I saw some one enter the room, yet she did not so much enter it, as seem to come out of the shadow. I lay, as now I saw, on the couch in the room to which Agmahd  had brought me. I was scarcely aware of how, or in what place, I had spent the dark hours of the night, but I felt that it was in his arms I had been carried back to my couch. I was glad to be there again and I was glad to see this child that approached me. She was younger than myself, and bright as the sunshine. She came near to me, and then paused; I put out my hand to her.  
"Give me the flower," she said.  
I hesitated, for the possession of the flower made me happy, but I could not refuse her, for she smiled, and none within the temple had smiled on me till now. I gave her my blossom.  
"Ah!" she cried, "there is water on its leaves!" and she flung it away from her as if in disgust. I started from my couch in angry haste to rescue my treasure. Instantly the child snatched it up again and fled from me with a cry of laughter. I followed her at my utmost speed. I was only a boy, and like a boy I chased her, for I was angry, and determined she should not win. We sped through great rooms wherein we saw no one, the child darting through the great curtains, and I following with the swiftness of a lad of the country. But suddenly I came against what seemed to me a wall of solid stone. How was it she could have eluded me? for I was close on her footsteps. I turned back in a passion of rage that made me blind, but I was silenced and stricken into quiet, for the priest Agmahd  stood before me. Had I done wrong? It could not be, for he was smiling.  
"Come with me," he said; and spoke so gently that I did not fear to follow him. He opened a door, and I saw before my eyes a garden full of flowers, a square garden enclosed in hedges, thickly covered too with flowers, and this garden was full of children all running hither and thither as swiftly as possible, in the intricacies of some game I did not understand. There were so many, and they moved so swiftly, that at first I was bewildered, but suddenly I saw the child among them who had taken my flower. She wore it on her dress, and she smiled in mockery as she saw me. I plunged into the crowd immediately, and seemed, though I knew not how, at once to obey the laws of the game or dance. I scarce knew which it was, for though I moved rightly among them, I could not tell what object they had in pursuit. I followed, and chased the figure of the girl. Although I did not succeed in approaching her, so swift was she, yet I grew quickly to enjoy the motion, the excitement, the merry faces, and laughing voices. The scent of the innumerable flowers filled me with delight, and I became passionately desirous to possess myself of some of them. I forgot the lotus blossom in thinking of these others, and yet I hurried on in the maze of the dance, promising myself a great cluster of flowers when the dance ceased; at that moment I did not fear Agmahd  or his displeasure, even if this garden were his. Then suddenly I heard a shout of a hundred gay children's voices.  
"He has won it! He has won it!"  
It was a ball, a golden ball, and light, so light, that I could throw it far, far up in the sky; yet it always return to my uplifted hands. I had found it at my feet when I heard the others shout, and immediately I knew the ball was mine. Now, I saw there was no one near me but the child, who had taken my lotus flower. It was not on her dress now, and I had forgotten it. But she was smiling, and I laughed to see her. I threw her the ball, and she threw it back to me, from one end of the garden to the other.  
Suddenly a bell rang out clear and loud in the air. "Come," she said; "it is school-time, come." She caught my hand and threw the ball away. I looked longingly after it.  
"That was mine," I said.  
"It is no use now," she answered. "You must gain another prize."  
We ran away, hand in hand, through another garden into a great room which I had not seen before. The children with whom I had played were here and a great many more. The air was heavy and sweet in this room. I was not tired, for I had but just risen from my long sleep and the morning was yet fresh, but now that I entered this room I felt weary and my head burned.  
Very soon I fell asleep, hearing the children's voices round me. When I awoke it was to hear a shout like that in the garden. "He has won it! He has won it!"  
I stood upon a kind of throne -- a lofty seat of marble. And I could hear my own voice in the air. I had been speaking. The children were round me, but they were clustered upon and about the marble seat. I remembered that the child who brought me here had said the teacher stood upon this throne. Why then were we, the children here? I looked, and lo, I saw that the room was full of priests! They stood in the place of the taught. They stood silent, immovable. Again I heard the children cry, "He has won it! He has won it!" I sprang from the throne in a sudden frenzy, I knew not why. As I stood upon the ground I looked and saw that the children were gone. I could not see any one of them but the child who had brought me here. She was standing on the throne, and she laughed and clapped her hands with glee. I wondered what it was that pleased her, and looking down I saw that I stood in a circle of white robed priests who had prostrated themselves until their foreheads touched the ground. What did this mean? I could not guess, and stood still in terror, when suddenly the child cried out as if in answer to my thought, "They worship you!"  
My wonder at her words was not greater than another wonder which fell on me. For I understood that I alone heard her voice.  

 
Chapter VIII 
I was taken back to my own room, and there the young priests brought me food. I was hungry, for I had not broken my fast, and I found the food exquisite. The young priests who brought it to me fell on one knee when they offered it; I looked wonderingly at them, for I could not guess why they should do so. Many of them came with fruits and rich syrup and delicate sweetmeats, such as I had never seen, and with flowers. Great clusters of flowers were brought and placed near me, and bushes covered with blossoms were put against the wall. I cried out with pleasure to see them, and as I cried out I saw Agmahd  standing within the shadow of the curtain. His eyes were on me, cold odd smiles. Yet I did not fear him now; I was full of a new spirit of pleasure, which made me bold. I went from flower to flower, kissing the blossoms. Their scent filled all the room with its richness. I was glad and proud, for I felt as if I need no longer be afraid of this cold priest, who stood motionless as though cut in marble. This sensation of fearlessness lifted a weight of agony from my childish soul.  
He turned and vanished, and as he passed under the curtain I saw the child at my side.  "See," she said, "I brought you these flowers."  
"You!" I exclaimed.  
"Yes, I told them you loved flowers. And these are strong and sweet; they grow in the earth. Are you tired, or shall we go out and play? Do you know that garden is our own and the ball is there? Some one took it back for you."  
"Tell me," I said, "why the priests kneel to me to-day.  
"Do you not know?" she said, looking at me curiously. "It is because you taught from the throne today, and spoke wise words they understood, but we could not. But we saw you had won a great prize. You will win all the prizes."  
I sat down upon my couch, and held my head with my hands and looked at her in wonder.  "But how could I do that and not know it?" I demanded.  
"You will be great when you do not struggle, when you do not know it you will win all the prizes. If you are quiet and happy you will be worshipped by all these priests, even the most splendid."  
I was dumb with wonder for a moment, then I said --  
 
"You are very little. How can you know all this?"  
"The flowers told me," she said with a laugh. "They are your friends. But it is all true. Now come and play with me."  
"Not yet," I said. And indeed I felt my head was hot and heavy, and my heart filled with wonder I could not understand her words.  
"It is impossible I can have taught from the throne," I exclaimed.  
"You did! and the high priests bowed their awful faces before you. For you told them how to perform some strange ceremony where you would be in the midst."  
"I!"  
"Yes, for you told them of what should be your dress, and how to prepare it, and what words to utter, as they placed it on you."  
I watched her with passionate interest. "Can you tell me more?" I cried, when she ceased.  
"You are to live among earth-fed flowers, and to dance with the children often. Oh, there were many things. But of the ceremony I cannot remember. But you will soon see, for it is to be to-night."  
I started from my couch in a sudden frenzy of fear.  
"Do not be afraid," she said, with a laugh. "For I am to be with you. That makes me glad, for I belong to the temple, yet have I never been admitted to one of the sacred ceremonies."  
"You belong to the temple! But they cannot hear your voice!"  
"Sometimes they cannot see me!" she said, laughing, "only Agmahd  can always see me, for I am his. But I cannot talk to him. I like you because I can talk to you. Come, let us go out and play. The flowers in the garden are as sweet as these, and the ball is there. Come."  
She took my hand and went quietly away. I let her lead me, for I was lost in thought. But outside the air was so rich and sweet, the flowers so bright, the sun so warm, that soon I forgot my thoughts in happiness.  
